<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf">
<head><meta charset="utf-8"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="dict.css"/></head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pilgrims"><b>right pilgrims</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="right"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> Archaic intensifier: genuine, true pilgrims; &#8220;right&#8221; used in the sense of &#8220;veritable&#8221; or &#8220;proper.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;those right pilgrims nameless among the stones&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="rimrock"><b>rimrock</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="rimrocks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The sheer rock wall or cliff forming the upper edge of a mesa, canyon, or plateau, typically of harder stone that caps softer strata below.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they hove toward the rimrock again&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> The hard cap-rock forming the upper edge of a mesa, plateau, or canyon wall; the layer of erosion-resistant stone that defines the rim of high terrain in the American West.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he hiked along the rimrock where he could see the tilted desert&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ringdoves"><b>ringdoves</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ringdove"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Doves with a ring or collar marking around the neck; in the American Southwest, likely the white-winged dove or Eurasian collared dove. A common desert bird.</p><p class="q">&#8220;ringdoves rose out of the chaparral by ones and by pairs&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ringgold"><b>Ringgold saddle</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="saddle"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(named object)</i> The U.S. Army Model 1844 dragoon saddle, designed by Major Samuel Ringgold and adopted in 1844 for mounted troops. Based on French hussar saddle design, it was the first major departure from traditional suspended-seat saddles and saw wide use during and after the Mexican War.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a new Ringgold saddle ironbound&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ristras"><b>ristras</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish / noun)</i> Strings of dried chile peppers (or garlic) hung to dry; a traditional method of preservation throughout Mexico and the American Southwest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;There were ristras of dried fruit and peppers&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="roadagent"><b>roadagent</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="roadagents"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An archaic American term for a highway robber or stagecoach bandit; used in the 19th-century West.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Any roadagent or gambler would have known&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="roadagent"><b>roadagent&#8217;s pass</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pass"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A sleight-of-hand transfer of a weapon (or here a bottle) from one hand to the other using a spinning motion; a frontier gunfighter&#8217;s trick for switching a pistol from a surrender grip to a firing grip.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he pitched the second bottle into his right hand in a roadagent&#8217;s pass&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="rookeries"><b>rookeries</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="rookerie"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> breeding colonies where many birds nest close together.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Egrets in their rookeries&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="rooks"><b>rooks</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="rook"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Large black corvid birds (*Corvus frugilegus*), related to crows; common scavengers in Europe. McCarthy uses the British term rather than &#8220;crows,&#8221; consistent with his elevated, archaic register.</p><p class="q">&#8220;rooks flew up as the riders approached&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="rowels"><b>rowels</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="rowel"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The small, star-shaped revolving wheels at the end of a spur, used to urge a horse forward.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the riders put rowels to their mounts&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ruddled"><b>ruddled</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ruddledly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Stained or smeared with ruddle, a red iron-oxide pigment (red ochre) traditionally used to mark livestock; here the bones appear reddened, suggesting dried blood or ochre-colored mineral stain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;white or ruddled bones lay strewn&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ruff"><b>ruff</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ruffs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A thick collar or fringe of fur around an animal&#8217;s neck or shoulders.</p><p class="q">&#8220;thick ruff of fur forward of the bear&#8217;s shoulder&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sable"><b>sable</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sablely"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Black; from heraldry, where sable denotes the black tincture on a coat of arms. An archaic or literary word for black.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Wrinkle not thy sable brow at me&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sabre"><b>sabre</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sabres"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A cavalry sword with a curved blade, single cutting edge, and a guard for the hand; the standard weapon of mounted military officers in the 19th century.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The captain of the lancers had raised his sabre&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sacristy"><b>sacristy</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sacristies"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A room in a church, usually beside the altar, where vestments, sacred vessels, and furnishings are stored and where clergy prepare for services.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The dead in the sacristy&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A room in a church where vestments, sacred vessels, and other liturgical equipment are kept, and where clergy prepare for services; typically a side room off the main nave.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Glanton led the horse into the sacristy&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="saddlebow"><b>saddlebow</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="saddlebows"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The arched front of a saddle &#8212; effectively the pommel&#8217;s structural frame; the curved piece a rider can grip. A slightly archaic term for the front arch.</p><p class="q">&#8220;It rode before him on the saddlebow&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="saddletrees"><b>saddletrees</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="saddletree"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The rigid frames or skeletons of saddles, traditionally made of wood encased in rawhide, to which leather covering is attached; the structural core that gives a saddle its shape.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Saddletrees eaten bare of their rawhide coverings&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sag"><b>sag</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sags"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A slight depression or hollow in open ground, giving a hunter concealed cover.</p><p class="q">&#8220;laid up in a sag on some rise&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="saguaro"><b>saguaro</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="saguaros"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A giant columnar cactus (<em>Carnegiea gigantea</em>) native to the Sonoran Desert of Arizona and northwestern Mexico, reaching up to 40 feet in height with fluted, ribbed trunks and upward-curving arms.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Saguaro forests&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="salient"><b>salient</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="salients"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A projecting angle or outward bulge in a line of earthworks; here, the raised inner slope of the well&#8217;s excavated walls, used as a defensive position.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they posted themselves about the inner slope of this salient&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sallied"><b>sallied out</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> Rode out boldly or suddenly onto open ground; from the military sense of &#8220;sally,&#8221; a sudden charge out from a defensive position into open country.</p><p class="q">&#8220;chucked up their horses and sallied out onto the flat&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sally"><b>sally forth</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="forth"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb phrase)</i> to rush or set out, especially suddenly or boldly.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;they themselves would sally forth into the downpour&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sallygate"><b>sallygate</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sallygates"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A small, secure gate or passage in a fortification through which defenders could make a sudden sortie (&#8220;sally&#8221;) without opening the main gate; from French <em>saillir</em> / Latin <em>salire</em>, &#8220;to leap.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;through an iron sallygate into a cool stone cellar&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="saltillo"><b>Saltillo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="saltillos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> <b>1.</b> The capital city of the Mexican state of Coahuila, in northeastern Mexico; known in the 19th century for its fine woven wool blankets, a trade good widely found across the northern frontier.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a woven wool blanket from Saltillo&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> <b>2.</b> City in northeastern Mexico, capital of the state of Coahuila; a significant military objective during the Mexican&#8211;American War and a base for U.S. operations.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Doniphan&#8217;s command pulled east for Saltillo&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="saltillo"><b>Saltillo blanket</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="blanket"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A distinctive woven wool blanket or serape produced in or in the style of Saltillo, the capital of Coahuila in northern Mexico, known for its elaborate geometric diamond (or eye) patterns and bright colors; highly prized trade goods throughout the Southwest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;upon a Saltillo blanket spread on the ground&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="saltpeter"><b>saltpeter</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="saltpeters"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Potassium nitrate (KNO&#8323;), a crystalline mineral compound that occurs naturally in cave soil enriched by bat guano; the essential oxidizer in black gunpowder.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Saltpeter and charcoal&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="antonio"><b>San Antonio de Bexar</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bexar"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> The colonial Spanish name for present-day San Antonio, Texas; founded as a military presidio and mission in 1718 and the principal city of Spanish and Mexican Texas.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The deadcart &#8212; San Antonio de Bexar&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bernardino"><b>San Bernardino</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A large Spanish land-grant hacienda in the Arizona&#8211;Sonora borderland, roughly 15 miles east of present-day Douglas, Arizona. Originally a massive cattle ranch granted by the Mexican government in the 1820s, abandoned by the mid-1830s under Apache raiding pressure, its ruins were a well-known landmark.</p><p class="q">&#8220;San Bernardino&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="diego"><b>San Diego</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A town on the Pacific coast of California, ceded to the United States after the Mexican-American War (1848); in 1850 it was a small settlement of about 650 people, still heavily Mexican in character, with a U.S. military garrison.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the town of San Diego on the old Mexican coast&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="felipe"><b>San Felipe</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A desert settlement in the Colorado Desert of California (near present-day Anza-Borrego), historically occupied by indigenous people and used as a waypoint by travelers on the southern overland trail.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;San Felipe&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="xavier"><b>San Xavier del Bac</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A mission church on the Tohono O&#8217;odham (Papago) reservation nine miles south of Tucson, founded by Father Kino in 1692. The current late-Baroque structure was built 1783&#8211;1797 and is considered the finest example of Spanish Colonial architecture in the United States.</p><p class="q">&#8220;San Xavier del Bac&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sangre"><b>sangre puro</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="puro"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Pure blood&#8221;; referring to the colonial Spanish concept of limpieza de sangre (blood purity), meaning unmixed indigenous ancestry as opposed to mestizo or European blood.</p><p class="q">&#8220;That gentleman is sangre puro&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="santa"><b>Santa Cruz</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cruz"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A real town in northern Sonora, Mexico, near the Arizona border on the Santa Cruz River, one of the old Spanish presidio settlements along the frontier.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Santa Cruz&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="valley"><b>Santa Cruz valley</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cruz"/><idx:iform value="santa"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> The valley of the Santa Cruz River, running through southern Arizona and northern Sonora, Mexico. One of the great north-south corridors of the region, lined by the major missions and the Presidio of Tucson.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The Santa Cruz valley&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="santa"><b>Santa Rita del Cobre</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cobre"/><idx:iform value="rita"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A copper-mining settlement in what is now Grant County, New Mexico, founded in 1803 by Mexican businessman Francisco Manuel Elguea and named &#8220;Saint Rita of the Copper.&#8221; Apache raids cut off its supply wagons from Chihuahua in the 1830s, forcing the garrison to abandon the site; the mines were largely idle until after the Civil War.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the abandoned ruins of Santa Rita del Cobre&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="saps"><b>saps</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sap"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Clubs or blackjacks; short, flexible weapons weighted at one end, often a leather pouch filled with shot or river rock.</p><p class="q">&#8220;saps of rawhide and riverrock looped about their wrists&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="borginnis"><b>Sarah Borginnis</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sarah"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> Sarah Bowman (c. 1813&#8211;1866), also known as Sarah Borginnis or Bourdette, a camp follower of Zachary Taylor&#8217;s army during the Mexican-American War, celebrated as the &#8220;Great Western&#8221; and &#8220;Heroine of Fort Brown.&#8221; Standing over six feet tall and of formidable physical presence, she ran hospitals and fed soldiers under fire; she was later breveted an honorary colonel and buried with military honors at Fort Yuma.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Sarah Borginnis &#8212; A confrontation&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sark"><b>sark</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sarks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A shirt or chemise; a dialect and archaic word surviving in Scottish and northern English speech, from Old English serc and Old Norse serkr.</p><p class="q">&#8220;sitting like a murdered anchorite discalced in ashes and sark&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sarsaparilla"><b>sarsaparilla</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sarsaparillas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A sweetened drink flavored with the root of the sarsaparilla plant (genus Smilax), popular in the 19th century as a tonic and mixer; a forerunner of root beer.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Someone had given the idiot whiskey mixed with sarsaparilla&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sashmilled"><b>sashmilled</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sashmilledly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Cut by a sash saw, a type of mill saw used to produce rough planks; referring to lumber of basic, unfinished quality.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the raw sashmilled boards of the counter&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sashwork"><b>sashwork</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sashworks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The grid of window-frame bars (sashes) dividing a window into panes; here the light from the windows falls in criss-crossed bars on the faces outside.</p><p class="q">&#8220;within the sashwork of the windowlights&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sass"><b>sass</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sas"/><idx:iform value="sassed"/><idx:iform value="sassing"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> To speak rudely or impertinently to someone; a dialectal American form of &#8220;sauce&#8221; used as a verb, meaning to answer back cheekily or disrespectfully.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Dont you sass me&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="saxons"><b>Saxons</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="saxon"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Here used for Anglo-Americans, drawing on the 19th-century ideology of Anglo-Saxonism, in which Americans of British descent identified themselves as &#8220;Anglo-Saxons.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;riding down the unhorsed Saxons&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scaffold"><b>scaffold</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="scaffolds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Here, a wooden gallows-like frame from which the effigy is hung; a raised platform or gibbet structure.</p><p class="q">&#8220;hanging from a scaffold a poor Judas fashioned from straw and old rags&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scantlin"><b>scantlin</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="scantlins"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Dialectal form of &#8220;scantling&#8221;: a small piece of sawn timber, such as a short plank or stud; heavy and solid enough to serve as a bludgeon.</p><p class="q">&#8220;I got busted in the head with a scantlin&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scapegrace"><b>scapegrace scions</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="scions"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> Scapegrace: a reckless, incorrigible rogue (literally one who has &#8220;escaped grace&#8221;); scion: a descendant or heir. The phrase means the disreputable younger sons of wealthy eastern families who had come West.</p><p class="q">&#8220;scapegrace scions of eastern dynasties&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scappled"><b>scappled</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="scappl"/><idx:iform value="scapple"/><idx:iform value="scappleded"/><idx:iform value="scappleding"/><idx:iform value="scappleds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Dressed or chipped (stone) roughly, knocking off projections to produce a workable but unfinished surface; here the judge uses a fragment of chert to chip away an entire rock engraving.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he scappled away one of the designs, leaving no trace of it&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scapular"><b>scapular</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="scapulars"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Originally a monastic garment worn over the shoulders; in Catholic devotional use, a smaller version consisting of two cloth panels connected by cords worn front and back. Here used literally as a cord or necklace-like string on which Brown threads the severed ears he collects as trophies.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he cut the ears from the boy&#8217;s head and strung them onto his scapular&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Originally a Catholic devotional object &#8212; two small cloth panels joined by cords and worn over the shoulders; here repurposed to describe a necklace of dried human ears worn looped around the neck in the same manner.</p><p class="q">&#8220;fingering the scapular of dried ears&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> A Catholic devotional object: two small cloth squares connected by strings and worn around the neck, a sign of piety; here inverted grotesquely as a necklace of severed ears in the same form.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The scapular&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>4.</b> A Catholic devotional object consisting of two small cloth or other panels joined by shoulder bands, worn around the neck as a religious token; here repurposed as a necklace string for trophies.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He pulled the aged scapular from his shirtfront&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scapulars"><b>scapulars</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="scapular"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Catholic devotional objects consisting of two small squares of cloth joined by strings and worn over the shoulders, front and back, as a sign of religious affiliation or piety.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the riders wearing scapulars or necklaces of dried and blackened human ears&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sclera"><b>sclera</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="scleras"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The white outer layer of the eyeball; the visible white of the eye surrounding the iris.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the sclera bloodshot and opaque&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scoria"><b>scoria</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="scorias"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Dark, vesicular (bubble-pocked) volcanic rock, ejected as molten blobs during eruptions and cooled with gas-bubble holes throughout; heavier than pumice and typically reddish-black.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a jumble of fallen rock and scoria&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A dark, highly porous volcanic rock full of bubble-like cavities (vesicles), formed when gas-rich lava solidifies rapidly; denser than pumice and usually dark gray, black, or reddish-brown.</p><p class="q">&#8220;broken shapes of scoria in a lava bed&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scow"><b>scow</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="scows"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A flat-bottomed boat with square ends, used to transport freight or passengers across rivers; a simple, barge-like craft.</p><p class="q">&#8220;travelers stepping aboard and squatting along the rails of the scow&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scows"><b>scows</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="scow"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Large flat-bottomed rectangular boats used for ferrying cargo or passengers across rivers; a common ferry vessel in the 19th-century American West.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The scows were on the west bank of the river discharging cargo&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scrag"><b>scrag</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="scrags"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Rough, scraggly brush or sparse, stunted vegetation; scrubby growth on poor ground.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the barren scrag&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scrapes"><b>scrapes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="scrape"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> McCarthy&#8217;s spelling of <em>serapes</em> (Spanish <em>sarapes</em>): long, rectangular woven blanket-shawls worn by Mexican men, typically brightly striped or patterned.</p><p class="q">&#8220;wrapped in these scrapes they looked like God&#8217;s profoundest peons&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scree"><b>scree</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="screes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A mass of loose broken rock fragments accumulated at the base of a cliff or steep slope by weathering and rockfall; unstable underfoot.</p><p class="q">&#8220;over the broken scree of a fan washed out of the draw&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scrog"><b>scrog</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="scrogs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A dialectal British (northern English and Scots) word for a stunted, scrubby bush or low tree; any naturally dwarfed shrub.</p><p class="q">&#8220;asleep under the smoldering skeleton of a blackened scrog&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scrub"><b>scrub pine</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pine"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun, botany)</i> a small, stunted pine that grows in poor, sandy soil.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;the thin bight of sand and scrub pine swimming in the haze.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scullery"><b>scullery</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sculleries"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> a small back room off a kitchen used for washing dishes and other rough kitchen work.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He stokes the scullery fire.&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A back room or lean-to used for washing dishes and heavy kitchen work; here the rear area of the saloon where glasses are cleaned.</p><p class="q">&#8220;fetching crates of bottles and racks of glasses steaming from the scullery&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scurf"><b>scurf</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="scurfs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Dry, flaky matter shed from a surface; loosely, any fine powdery or scaly debris shed from a body. Here used metaphorically for sparks flung from the burning tree as if scaling off a forge.</p><p class="q">&#8220;shed scattered sparks &#8230; like hot scurf blown from some unreckonable forge&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scurvid"><b>scurvid</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="scurvidly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Scurvy; mean, contemptible, mangy; here describing lean and wretched mongrel dogs.</p><p class="q">&#8220;bruited by scurvid curs that howled woundedly&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="secular"><b>secular aloes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="aloes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> Long-lived, centuries-old aloe plants; &#8220;secular&#8221; here carries its Latin sense of lasting for ages or generations, not the modern religious sense.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the secular aloes blooming like phantasmagoria&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="seep"><b>seep</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="seeps"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A spot where groundwater slowly reaches the surface without forming a defined current; distinguished from a spring by its slow, intermittent flow, often creating only a small wet patch in dry terrain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;It might could be a seep&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="selvage"><b>selvage</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="selvages"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The self-finished edge of a woven fabric; used here figuratively for the edge or border zone where the sea oats give way to the beach.</p><p class="q">&#8220;along the selvage of sea oats above the beach&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Literally, the finished self-edge of woven cloth; here transferred to mean the border or rim of the well&#8217;s sandy bank &#8212; the distinct edge where the sand ends at the top of the pit.</p><p class="q">&#8220;went around the warm sand selvage of the well&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="serapes"><b>serapes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="serape"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Long, brightly striped woolen shawls or blankets worn as outer garments in Mexico; a traditional garment of Mexican rancheros and indigenous cultures.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the heads of the horses and mules muffled in serapes&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Brightly striped woolen blankets or shawls worn as outer garments across the shoulders in Mexico and the Southwest; from Spanish *sarape*.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the hide slickers and raw wool serapes and vests&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sere"><b>sere</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="serely"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Dried out and withered; parched.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The plains were sere and burntlooking&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sereno"><b>sereno</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="serenos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Literally &#8220;serene&#8221; or &#8220;clear&#8221;; the town night-watchman who patrolled the streets calling out the hour and the weather condition (&#8220;sereno&#8221; meant all was calm).</p><p class="q">&#8220;The sereno&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="serried"><b>serried</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="serriedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> <b>1.</b> Pressed close together in ranks; densely crowded.</p><p class="q">&#8220;crumble in the serried planes of heat&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> <b>2.</b> Pressed closely together in dense rows or ranks.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the farthest serried rimlands blue with haze&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="triggers"><b>set triggers</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A rifle mechanism with two triggers: cocking the rear (&#8220;set&#8221;) trigger sensitises the front one so that the slightest touch fires the weapon, enabling more precise aim.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The rifle had set triggers&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="settle"><b>settle</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="settles"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A long, high-backed wooden bench with arms, seating several people; the tall back served as a draught shield and was common in inns and public rooms from medieval times onward.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a kind of settle made from some dark wood&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="shacto"><b>shacto coat</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="coat"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An obscure frontier garment of uncertain origin; a heavy, loosely cut cloth coat, likely of blanket wool, worn on the California trail and in the southwestern borderlands in the mid-19th century.</p><p class="q">&#8220;An old man in a shacto coat and a long beard&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="shadowline"><b>shadowline</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="shadowlines"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The boundary between the sunlit and shaded sides of a slope or terrain feature; the edge of a shadow cast by a mountain or ridge.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They trod the shadowline under the mountains&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="shakos"><b>shakos</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="shako"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Tall, cylindrical military dress caps with a flat top, a visor, and often a metal plate and horsehair plume at the front; standard headgear for many 19th-century armies.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They wore tall shakos faced with metal plates and horsehair plumes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="shales"><b>shales</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="shale"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Flat slabs or thin layers of rock (here used as a resting place for the water bottle).</p><p class="q">&#8220;the water bottle from the shales&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="shaley"><b>shaley</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="shaleyly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Having the character of shale: thin, flat-layered, crumbling rock; here applied to the unpaved streets between the ruined adobe buildings.</p><p class="q">&#8220;through the shaley streets&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="shambles"><b>shambles</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="shamble"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In its original and here-intended sense, a slaughterhouse or place of butchery; the modern meaning of &#8220;mess&#8221; or &#8220;chaos&#8221; derived from this earlier one.</p><p class="q">&#8220;white or ruddled bones lay strewn over the rocks in a primitive shambles&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="calibre"><b>Sharp&#8217;s fifty calibre</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fifty"/><idx:iform value="sharp"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> A Sharps single-shot breechloading rifle in .50 caliber, manufactured by the Sharps Rifle Company; the standard long-range buffalo gun of the 1870s, capable of accurate fire at several hundred yards.</p><p class="q">&#8220;It was a Sharp&#8217;s fifty calibre&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sheetiron"><b>sheetiron stove</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="stove"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A stove made from sheet iron (thin rolled iron plate), cheap and common in frontier buildings, as opposed to the heavier cast-iron parlor stove.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a large homemade sheetiron stove&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sheetlightning"><b>sheetlightning</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sheetlightnings"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Lightning that illuminates a broad area of sky as a diffuse sheet or flash, rather than appearing as a distinct bolt &#8212; caused by lightning within or behind clouds, the direct bolt hidden from view.</p><p class="q">&#8220;All night sheetlightning quaked sourceless to the west&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="shellalegh"><b>shellalegh</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="shellaleghs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> a shillelagh: a thick wooden cudgel or club, traditionally Irish.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He was carrying a huge shellalegh.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sherry"><b>sherry</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sherries"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A fortified wine from the Jerez region of southern Spain, ranging from very dry to sweet; a standard aperitif served before formal dinners in the 19th century.</p><p class="q">&#8220;glasses of sherry poured&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="shirring"><b>shirring</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="shirr"/><idx:iform value="shirre"/><idx:iform value="shirringed"/><idx:iform value="shirringing"/><idx:iform value="shirrings"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> To slide, strip, or pull off in layers &#8212; here meaning the violent jolting of the wagon was tearing the flesh from the sick men&#8217;s bones. From dialectal &#8220;shir,&#8221; to slide or strip away.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the slamming and jarring of the wagon half shirring the meat from their bones&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="shoat"><b>shoat</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="shoats"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A young pig that has been weaned but is not yet fully grown.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a roast shoat on a platter&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="shotpouch"><b>shotpouch</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="shotpouches"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A leather bag or pouch carried by a muzzle-loader shooter, holding the balls (shot) used to reload the firearm.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he sat on the ground and fumbled with his shotpouch&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="shuttles"><b>shuttles</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="shuttle"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Here used to mean sharpened stakes or skewers; the word normally refers to the bobbin carrier in a loom but is applied figuratively to any elongated, pointed stick passed through something.</p><p class="q">&#8220;skewered through the cords of their heels with sharpened shuttles of green wood&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="schlafen"><b>Sie m&#252;ssen schlafen aber ich muss tanzen</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="aber"/><idx:iform value="muss"/><idx:iform value="mussen"/><idx:iform value="müssen"/><idx:iform value="tanzen"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(German)</i> &#8220;You must sleep, but I must dance.&#8221; An inversion of a line from the 19th-century German poet Theodor Storm (&#8220;Hyazinthen,&#8221; 1851), whose original reads &#8220;Ich m&#246;chte schlafen, aber du mu&#223;t tanzen&#8221; (&#8220;I would like to sleep, but you must dance&#8221;). McCarthy reverses subject and verb, making the speaker the dancer rather than the sleeper.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Sie m&#252;ssen schlafen aber ich muss tanzen&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="siesta"><b>siesta</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="siestas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> An afternoon rest period; from Spanish (ultimately from Latin <em>sexta hora</em>, sixth hour, i.e. noon).</p><p class="q">&#8220;they did not noon nor did they siesta&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="siete"><b>Siete, ocho dias</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dias"/><idx:iform value="ocho"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Seven, eight days&#8221;; the alcalde is saying the prisoner left seven or eight days ago.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He is gone. Siete, ocho dias.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sign"><b>sign</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="signs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In hunting and tracking usage, physical traces or evidence of an animal&#8217;s presence: tracks, scat, markings, or disturbance.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they saw sign of their vicinity&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="silica"><b>silica</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="silicas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Silicon dioxide, the mineral compound that makes up quartz and most desert sand; here describing the dry hissing sound of wind-driven sand grains.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the faint silica hiss of the wind&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="siliceous"><b>siliceous</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="siliceou"/><idx:iform value="siliceously"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Composed of or containing silica (silicon dioxide), the mineral that makes up sand, quartz, and flint; here meaning a vast expanse of sand.</p><p class="q">&#8220;this great siliceous griddle&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="silkmullioned"><b>silkmullioned</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="silkmullionedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Having mullions (the vertical dividing bars of a carriage window or side panel) covered or trimmed in silk; denoting an elegant, expensive vehicle.</p><p class="q">&#8220;within his silkmullioned sulky&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sinaloa"><b>Sinaloa</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sinaloas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A Mexican state on the northwest Pacific coast, bordering Sonora, Chihuahua, and the Gulf of California; its capital is Culiac&#225;n.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The surgeon&#8217;s assistant was a student from Sinaloa&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="singletrees"><b>singletrees</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="singletree"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The pivoting horizontal crossbars to which the harness traces of a draft animal are attached, linking the animal to a vehicle or implement. Also called whiffletrees or swingletrees.</p><p class="q">&#8220;chains and packsaddles, singletrees, dead mules, wagons&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sirius"><b>Sirius</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> The brightest star in the night sky, designated Alpha Canis Majoris (&#8220;Dog Star&#8221;); rises in the southeast and arcs across the southern sky, used here as a navigational reference point.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they&#8217;d kept Sirius at their left on the southwest horizon&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sizing"><b>sizing</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sizings"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A sealant (typically rabbit-skin glue) applied to raw canvas before painting to reduce absorbency and protect the fibers. Sizing makes earlier painted layers faintly visible through subsequent ones &#8212; the simile evokes ghostly traces showing through.</p><p class="q">&#8220;like the shade of old work through sizing on a canvas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="skein"><b>skein</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="skeins"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A loose, tangled mass or thin layer; here a low-lying, wispy layer of mist resting on the water&#8217;s surface.</p><p class="q">&#8220;there was a low skein of mist on the water&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="skelps"><b>skelps</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="skelp"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Strips of wrought iron or steel that are twisted and forge-welded together to form a gun barrel; the individual component strips in a damascus barrel.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the purple barrels were welded up from triple skelps&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="skelter"><b>skelter</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="skeltered"/><idx:iform value="skeltering"/><idx:iform value="skelters"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> to scurry or scatter in a hurried, disorderly way (as in helter-skelter).</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;leaves lope by the roadside and skelter on in the night fields.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="skeltered"><b>skeltered</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="skelter"/><idx:iform value="skeltere"/><idx:iform value="skeltereded"/><idx:iform value="skeltereding"/><idx:iform value="skeltereds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Fled in a hurried, scattering rush; a dialectal or archaic term for fleeing in disorderly haste.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the fleeing lancers as they skeltered up the trail&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="skiffle"><b>skiffle band</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="band"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A small, informal musical ensemble playing on whatever instruments are at hand, often improvised; in American usage from the early 20th century, associated with rent-party jug-band and folk music, but McCarthy uses the term in its broader sense of cheap, ad hoc music-making.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A sort of skiffle band had struck up a lugubrious air&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="skifts"><b>skifts</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="skift"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Thin, light dustings or patches (dialectal); a small, scattered amount of snow or other material.</p><p class="q">&#8220;skifts of snow in the lee of the stone ledges&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="skim"><b>skim ice</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A thin, fragile layer of ice formed on the surface of still or slow-moving water when temperatures barely drop below freezing.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a small river, skim ice, a frozen marsh&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A thin, fragile sheet of ice that forms on still or slow-moving water in cold weather.</p><p class="q">&#8220;skim ice lay along the sandy shore&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="skylight"><b>skylight</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="skylighted"/><idx:iform value="skylighting"/><idx:iform value="skylights"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> To silhouette a figure against the sky by sighting along the horizon; a scout&#8217;s technique of lying flat on the ground to detect movement of riders or sentries outlined against the lighter sky.</p><p class="q">&#8220;lie flat on his belly and skylight the outriders&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="slag"><b>slag</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="slags"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The stony waste matter separated from metals during the smelting of ore; here piled in large cones outside the processing works.</p><p class="q">&#8220;past great cones of slag and tailings&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> The stony waste matter separated from metal during smelting or refining; here used as raw, debased material from which the counterfeiter tries to fashion usable coin-metal.</p><p class="q">&#8220;contriving from cold slag brute in the crucible a face that will pass&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="slank"><b>slank</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="slanked"/><idx:iform value="slanking"/><idx:iform value="slanks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Archaic and dialectal past tense of <em>slink</em> (the standard modern form is <em>slunk</em>); the older strong-verb form preserved in literary and dialect English.</p><p class="q">&#8220;wolves slank from the doorways and dissolved in the fog of the streets&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="slaver"><b>slaver</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="slavers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A person who buys and sells enslaved people; a slave trader.</p><p class="q">&#8220;I was a slaver, dont care to tell it&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sleared"><b>sleared</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="slear"/><idx:iform value="sleare"/><idx:iform value="sleareded"/><idx:iform value="sleareding"/><idx:iform value="sleareds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Dialectal past tense of <em>slear</em>: to smear, blur, or cause to shimmer as if glazed; used of surfaces that seem to melt or waver under intense heat.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the rocks trembled and sleared in the sun&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="slickers"><b>slickers</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="slicker"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Waterproof rain garments, typically long oilskin or rubberized coats worn by riders in the American West.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they rode slouched under slickers hacked from greasy halfcured hides&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sloat"><b>Sloat</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sloats"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> Commodore John Drake Sloat (1781&#8211;1867), U.S. Navy officer who commanded the Pacific Squadron during the Mexican-American War and seized Monterey, California, in July 1846, raising the American flag and claiming California for the United States. The text alludes to this famous officer when Glanton asks the recruit whether he is related to &#8220;the commodore of that name.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;if he were kin to the commodore of that name&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="slops"><b>slops</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="slop"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> dirty waste water, kitchen refuse, or the contents of a chamber pot.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;she carries out his slops.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sloughing"><b>sloughing</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="slough"/><idx:iform value="sloughe"/><idx:iform value="sloughinged"/><idx:iform value="sloughinging"/><idx:iform value="sloughings"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Peeling or falling away in layers; dissolving and crumbling; here describing the soft decay of sun-dried mud-brick walls.</p><p class="q">&#8220;rainwashed and lumpy and sloughing into a soft decay&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="smelterlights"><b>smelterlights</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="smelterlight"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> McCarthy&#8217;s coinage for the eerie luminous glow &#8212; resembling the blue light of a smelter or forge &#8212; that plays over metal objects during an electrical storm; a form of St. Elmo&#8217;s fire.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Soft smelterlights advanced upon the metal of the harness&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="smelterpots"><b>smelterpots</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="smelterpot"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Crucibles or vessels used in smelting, in which ore is melted at very high heat; here describing tidal pools as glowing brilliantly like molten metal.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The tide-pools bright as smelterpots&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="smeltinghouse"><b>smeltinghouse</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="smeltinghouses"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A building containing furnaces for smelting ore &#8212; heating it to extract metal from rock; at Santa Rita del Cobre this was used to process copper ore.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the smeltinghouse where piles of ore stood about&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="social"><b>social</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="socials"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A social gathering or informal community event; used as a standalone noun in American dialectal and 19th-century usage, where it is not the common modern adjective but a specific word for such a function.</p><p class="q">&#8220;like men returning late from a social, from a wedding or a death&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sociedad"><b>Sociedad</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sociedads"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Society&#8221; or &#8220;Association&#8221;; here referring to the official Chihuahuan organization (the Sociedad) that contracted and funded the scalp-hunting campaign.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the Sociedad was disbanded and the bounty rescinded&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="socieded"><b>socieded de guerra. Contra los b&#225;rbaros.</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="barbaros"/><idx:iform value="bárbaros"/><idx:iform value="contra"/><idx:iform value="guerra"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Literally &#8220;society of war. Against the barbarians&#8221;; the old man&#8217;s imperfect Spanish describes the scalp-hunting companies contracted by the Chihuahua state government to wage war against raiding Apache bands, whom Mexican authorities officially termed &#8220;barbarous Indians.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;You are socieded de guerra. Contra los barbaros.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="soda"><b>soda ash</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Sodium carbonate deposited on the surface of alkali flats; a fine, pale, powdery residue of evaporated desert lake beds.</p><p class="q">&#8220;disappeared in a drifting wake of soda ash&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="plain"><b>soda plain</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="soda"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A flat desert terrain with a surface crust of sodium carbonate (soda ash), an alkali flat common to the arid basins of the Chihuahuan Desert.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a broad soda plain with dry thunder&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>
