<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf">
<head><meta charset="utf-8"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="dict.css"/></head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="solarium"><b>solarium</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="solariums"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A room or space flooded with sunlight; here used ironically to describe the cantina&#8217;s shaft of sunlight falling through the hole in the ceiling.</p><p class="q">&#8220;circled this reeking solarium and stood before Glanton&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="soledad"><b>Soledad</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="soledads"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> Soledad Street, one of the historic streets of San Antonio, Texas, named from Spanish <em>soledad</em> (&#8220;solitude&#8221;) because it long had only a single house on it. By the 1840s it was a developed commercial street with shops and stables near the Main Plaza.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a deserter in a Soledad livery stable&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="solerette"><b>solerette</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="solerettes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A flexible steel shoe, made of overlapping plates, forming the foot-piece of a suit of medieval armor; also spelled &#8220;solleret.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;The solerette&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="solpugas"><b>solpugas</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="solpuga"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Large desert arachnids of the order Solifugae (also called solifuges, camel spiders, sun spiders, or wind scorpions); not true spiders or scorpions, they have enormous chelicerae (jaw-claws) and run rapidly across desert sand. Common in the Sonoran region.</p><p class="q">&#8220;tarantulas and solpugas and vinegarroons&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="riddle"><b>Somos amigos del Se&#241;or Riddle</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="amigos"/><idx:iform value="senor"/><idx:iform value="señor"/><idx:iform value="somos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;We are friends of Mr. Riddle.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Somos amigos del Se&#241;or Riddle&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="malos"><b>Son muy malos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;They are very bad / dangerous.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Son muy malos, said the speaker&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sonora"><b>Sonora</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sonoras"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A state in northwestern Mexico bordering Arizona and the Gulf of California; in the late 1840s it was plagued by Apache raids and politically unstable, making it a target of American filibustering ambitions.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Sonora will become a United States territory&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sonorans"><b>Sonorans</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> Inhabitants of Sonora, the northwestern Mexican state bordering what is now Arizona; many Sonoran migrants traveled the Gila Trail to California during the Gold Rush.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they encountered a party of Sonorans up and about&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sopilotes"><b>Sopilotes</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Vultures, specifically the black vulture (<em>Coragyps atratus</em>); a Mexican-Spanish variant of <em>zopilote</em>, itself from Nahuatl <em>tzopīlōtl</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Sopilotes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sotol"><b>sotol</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sotols"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A spiky desert plant (Dasylirion spp.) of the Chihuahuan Desert, related to yucca; its tall, straight flowering stalks were used by indigenous peoples for construction and as lance shafts.</p><p class="q">&#8220;fashioned from a sotol stalk&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> <em>Dasylirion</em> spp.: an evergreen desert plant related to agave, with a tall woody flower stalk (quiote) that burns readily and was used as a torch by indigenous peoples of the Chihuahuan Desert region.</p><p class="q">&#8220;torches of sotol or primitive lanterns of pierced tin&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sotols"><b>sotols</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sotol"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Desert plants of the genus <em>Dasylirion</em>, resembling yucca, with a dense rosette of long stiff saw-edged leaves and a tall flower stalk. Native to the Chihuahuan Desert and southwest Texas; their hearts were used for food and their stalks for fuel and fodder.</p><p class="q">&#8220;nothing but a stall half filled with dry sotols&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="spalls"><b>spalls</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="spall"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Chips or fragments broken off stone, rock, or ore; here used figuratively for meteors or fragments of burning matter streaking across the sky.</p><p class="q">&#8220;migratory spalls of burning matter crossed constantly about him&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="spanceled"><b>spanceled</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="spancel"/><idx:iform value="spancele"/><idx:iform value="spanceleded"/><idx:iform value="spanceleding"/><idx:iform value="spanceleds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Hobbled or tethered; from &#8220;spancel,&#8221; a rope or noose used to hobble an animal by binding its legs. Here used figuratively of horse and rider bound to their own shadows.</p><p class="q">&#8220;horse and rider spanceled to their shadows&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="specie"><b>specie</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="species"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Coined money&#8212;gold or silver in the form of minted coins&#8212;as distinct from paper currency or promissory notes.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a good assortment of specie, gold and silver&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Coined money; currency in the form of metal coins (gold or silver) as opposed to paper notes or barter goods.</p><p class="q">&#8220;whatever the assessment of damage levied there was no specie acceptable &#8230; other than whiskey&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> Coined money; currency in the form of metal coins as opposed to paper banknotes.</p><p class="q">&#8220;render this residual specie current in the markets&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="spectra"><b>spectra</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="spectras"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Plural of <em>spectrum</em>; bands of colored light produced by dispersion, or prismatic halos and rainbow-like streaks seen at the edges of vision under extreme heat and glare &#8212; here referring to optical effects along the periphery of overheated, sun-blasted eyes.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the painted spectra racing out at the corners&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="speculants"><b>speculants</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="speculant"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Those who speculate philosophically; thinkers or theorisers, here the ex-priest and judge reasoning about chance and fate.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the judge &#8230; was abreast of the speculants&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="spirit"><b>spirit level</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="level"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A tool used to determine whether a surface is exactly horizontal, consisting of a sealed glass tube of liquid with an air bubble that centers when level. Here used as a simile for a perfectly flat horizon.</p><p class="q">&#8220;flat and true as a spirit level&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="spirits"><b>spirits of ether</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ether"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> A pharmaceutical preparation of diethyl ether dissolved in alcohol (also called Hoffmann&#8217;s Drops), used in the 19th century as a sedative and mild anesthetic; distinct from pure inhaled ether.</p><p class="q">&#8220;We have spirits of ether. You wont need the whiskey&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="spittoons"><b>spittoons</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="spittoon"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> containers to spit into, used especially by tobacco chewers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;tables by the wall and spittoons on the floor.&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Metal or ceramic vessels set on floors for spitting tobacco juice into; a standard fixture in 19th-century saloons and public rooms.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He swept around the spittoons&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="spoilbanks"><b>spoilbanks</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="spoilbank"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Mounds of earth, rock, or debris heaped up beside an excavation, well, or mine from the material dug out; waste banks from digging.</p><p class="q">&#8220;descended among a series of dunes and spoilbanks to Carrizo Creek&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sprent"><b>sprent</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sprently"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Archaic past participle of &#8220;sprinkle&#8221;; scattered or sprinkled densely over a surface.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The night sky lies so sprent with stars&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="spume"><b>spume</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="spumes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Froth or foam; here applied to the dust kicked up by galloping horses, compared to sea-spray rising from a vanished lake.</p><p class="q">&#8220;kicking up the spume that was not real&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="squailed"><b>squailed</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="squail"/><idx:iform value="squaile"/><idx:iform value="squaileded"/><idx:iform value="squaileding"/><idx:iform value="squaileds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Dialectal (West Country English) past tense of <em>squail</em>: to throw a stick or weighted object with a sideways or underhanded fling, originally at game in trees.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he picked up a stone and squailed it at them&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="squibs"><b>squibs</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="squib"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Small fireworks or explosive charges that burn with a hissing noise before detonating; used here to stuff the effigy for a dramatic pyrotechnic explosion.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Its raggedy clothes were packed with squibs and rockets&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="squired"><b>squired</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="squir"/><idx:iform value="squire"/><idx:iform value="squireded"/><idx:iform value="squireding"/><idx:iform value="squireds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Escorted or attended (a woman), especially to lead her through the figures of a dance; to act as a woman&#8217;s gallant companion.</p><p class="q">&#8220;squired first one and then another of the ladies through the steps&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="stanched"><b>stanched</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="stanch"/><idx:iform value="stanche"/><idx:iform value="stancheded"/><idx:iform value="stancheding"/><idx:iform value="stancheds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Stopped flowing; from &#8220;staunch&#8221; or &#8220;stanch,&#8221; meaning to stop the flow of blood or another liquid.</p><p class="q">&#8220;where the wounds had stanched&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="stand"><b>stand</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="stands"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In hunting, a group of animals remaining stationary and approachable, allowing a hunter to shoot several in succession before the rest flee.</p><p class="q">&#8220;until he had shot a stand of three or four&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="stands"><b>stands</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="stand"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In buffalo hunting, a &#8220;stand&#8221; was a situation in which a hunter, positioned downwind, could pick off animals one by one without triggering a stampede, because the herd milled in confusion rather than fleeing.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the stands he&#8217;d made against them&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="starsprent"><b>starsprent</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="starsprently"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Archaic and poetic: sprinkled or strewn with stars. From Middle English &#8220;sprent&#8221; (scattered, sprinkled).</p><p class="q">&#8220;the starsprent reaches of the galaxies&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="stickpin"><b>stickpin</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="stickpins"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A long decorative straight pin worn vertically in a necktie or cravat, with an ornamental head (pearl, gemstone, or figured motif) and a long shaft; a status accessory of Victorian men&#8217;s dress.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a stickpin and in his belt a leathercovered clip&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="stives"><b>stives</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="stive"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Small bags or pouches, here used to hold raw gold dust or nuggets; an archaic term for a compact packet of material.</p><p class="q">&#8220;raw gold in little leather stives&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="stobs"><b>stobs</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="stob"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Dialectal (Southern US, Appalachian, and Scots) for short stakes, posts, or stubs; a stob is a pointed piece of wood driven into the ground or left projecting from a broken branch.</p><p class="q">&#8220;hung so by their throats from the broken stobs of a mesquite&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="stock"><b>stock shot loose at the tang</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="loose"/><idx:iform value="shot"/><idx:iform value="tang"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> The wooden stock of the rifle became loose where it joined the metal receiver (tang), from the cumulative vibration of thousands of rounds.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the stock shot loose at the tang&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="stockingfooted"><b>stockingfooted</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="stockingfootedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Describes a horse with white markings (stockings) on all four legs from hoof to knee or hock; a prized coloring in frontier horse culture.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the recruiter splendid on the stockingfooted horse&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="stockscale"><b>stockscale</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="stockscales"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A large weighing platform or scale used to weigh livestock; here used to verify the judge&#8217;s extraordinary weight.</p><p class="q">&#8220;I added up the counters on the bar with my own&#8230;eyes at a stockscale&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="stone"><b>stone</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="stones"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A British unit of weight equal to 14 pounds (about 6.35 kg); &#8220;twenty-four stone&#8221; is approximately 336 pounds.</p><p class="q">&#8220;him weighin twenty-four stone&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="stove"><b>stove</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="stoved"/><idx:iform value="stoves"/><idx:iform value="stoving"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> <b>1.</b> past tense of <em>stave</em>: broken or crushed inward, caved in.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The Dipper stove.&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> <b>2.</b> Past tense of <em>stave</em> (archaic strong form): to smash or break in; to stave in a door is to break it down by force.</p><p class="q">&#8220;opened it again to save the doors being stove&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="stovepipe"><b>stovepipe</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="stovepipes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A metal pipe venting smoke from a stove through a roof or wall; here improvised as a chimney for the hermit&#8217;s hut.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The wind moaned in the section of stovepipe that was run through the roof&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="stovepipe"><b>stovepipe hat</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A tall, cylindrical, flat-topped silk hat &#8212; the style associated with Abraham Lincoln. Fashionable among men in the 1840s&#8211;60s in the United States.</p><p class="q">&#8220;one in a stovepipe hat&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="straightbrim"><b>straightbrim hat</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A hat with a flat, uncurved brim; characteristic of plain-sect religious communities such as Mennonites and Amish who wore simple, unadorned hats as a mark of humility.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a black and straightbrim hat set square on his head&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="strand"><b>strand</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="strands"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The shore or beach, especially the flat expanse between the waterline and dry land.</p><p class="q">&#8220;across the gravel strand to the beach&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="studebaker"><b>Studebaker wagons</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="wagons"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> Wagons made by the Studebaker Brothers Manufacturing Company of South Bend, Indiana, founded 1852; by the 1870s Studebaker was the largest wagon manufacturer in the world, and its heavy freight wagons were the standard on the Great Plains.</p><p class="q">&#8220;I seen Studebaker wagons with six and eight ox teams&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sulky"><b>sulky</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sulkies"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A light, two-wheeled, one-horse carriage built for a single occupant; a vehicle associated with the wealthy or with harness racing.</p><p class="q">&#8220;his silkmullioned sulky clatter forth&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sulphurous"><b>sulphurous</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sulphurou"/><idx:iform value="sulphurously"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Having the smell or taste of sulphur (sulfur); describing water with a strong mineral, rotten-egg-like quality.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The water was salty, sulphurous&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sup"><b>sup</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sups"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A small mouthful or sip of liquid.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Thought you might spare a man a sup of water&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="supernumeraries"><b>supernumeraries</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="supernumerarie"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Extra persons beyond the regular or necessary number; in theatrical usage, walk-on extras with no speaking role.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the company picked their way past like supernumeraries in a dream&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="surbated"><b>surbated</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="surbatedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Archaic: having bruised, worn, or tender hooves or feet from excessive travel; said of a horse that has been ridden too hard over rough ground.</p><p class="q">&#8220;his mount surbated and all but blown&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sutler"><b>sutler</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sutlers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A licensed civilian merchant who followed an army or operated at a military post, selling goods not issued by the army &#8212; tobacco, liquor, clothing, sugar. McCarthy here uses the word figuratively for Death or a death-figure trailing the column.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the pale sutler who pursued them drives unseen&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sutlers"><b>sutlers</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sutler"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Civilian merchants who followed armies or frontier camps to sell provisions, liquor, and supplies; here improvised vendors who set up at the party.</p><p class="q">&#8220;whole trains of wagons and carts overseen by impromptu sutlers&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="suttee"><b>suttee</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="suttees"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The Hindu practice (now illegal) in which a widow burns on her husband&#8217;s funeral pyre; used here figuratively for the dog being dragged to its death on Glanton&#8217;s burning funeral pyre, as if in ritual sacrifice to accompany its master.</p><p class="q">&#8220;it was snatched after in howling suttee&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sutured"><b>sutured</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="suturedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Having been stitched closed with sutures; here describing battle wounds sewn shut, leaving visible scars.</p><p class="q">&#8220;all tattooed, branded, sutured&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="suzerain"><b>suzerain</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="suzerains"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A dominant lord or state that holds authority over vassal rulers while allowing them limited local autonomy; a paramount sovereign whose authority overrides subordinate ones.</p><p class="q">&#8220;will he be properly suzerain of the earth&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="swag"><b>swag</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="swags"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A low depression or hollow in the ground; a concave fold in terrain that collects water or shelters vegetation.</p><p class="q">&#8220;through a wooded swag&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A low depression or hollow along a slope or ridgeline; a regional American terrain term for a saddle or dip between two higher points.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The muleteers benched out in a swag on the trail&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="swagged"><b>swagged</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="swaggedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Decorated with or hanging in swags &#8212; drooping festoons or ornamental folds; here describing the looping decorative plasterwork or remaining wall drapery.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the tall swagged walls with their faded frescos&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="swale"><b>swale</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="swales"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A low-lying, marshy or grassy depression between hills or ridges; a shallow tract of moist ground.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the evening sun declines before him beyond an endless swale&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A low-lying, often moist stretch of ground bearing rank vegetation; a shallow natural depression in otherwise dry terrain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;recruited their horses in the sparse swale&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> A low-lying, moist, or marshy depression in a stretch of land; a shallow hollow.</p><p class="q">&#8220;out of the swale on the far side where it had been feeding&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>4.</b> A low-lying, elongated hollow or shallow depression in the landscape, usually dry except after rain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He bivouacked in a barren swale&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="swivelbore"><b>swivelbore</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="swivelbores"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A firearm with two barrels that rotate on a common axis, allowing the shooter to swing (&#8220;swivel&#8221;) a second loaded barrel into firing position after the first is discharged.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Come charge that swivelbore of yours&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="systole"><b>systole</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="systoles"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The rhythmic contraction of the heart that pumps blood outward; one phase of the heartbeat.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they listened to the systole of the rubymeated hearts that hung within them&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tabernacle"><b>tabernacle</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tabernacles"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In a Catholic church, the locked metal or stone box fixed on the altar that houses the reserved consecrated Eucharist between Masses; considered the dwelling-place of Christ, from Latin <em>tabernaculum</em>, &#8220;tent.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;the tabernacle looted and the great sleeping God of the Mexicans routed from his golden cup&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tabernacled"><b>tabernacled</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tabernacl"/><idx:iform value="tabernacle"/><idx:iform value="tabernacleded"/><idx:iform value="tabernacleding"/><idx:iform value="tabernacleds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Housed or sheltered, as in a tabernacle (a tent or temporary dwelling); used here in a theological sense: each person is given dwelling within every other.</p><p class="q">&#8220;every man is tabernacled in every other&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tableland"><b>tableland</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tablelands"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A broad, flat-topped elevated landform &#8212; a plateau or high plain &#8212; with steep escarpment edges dropping away on at least one side.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the man watching the tableland to the south&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tack"><b>tack</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tacks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The collective term for a horse&#8217;s equipment &#8212; saddle, bridle, bit, blanket, and related gear; short for &#8220;tackle.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;The kid had his new tack slung up on his shoulder&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> The equipment used in riding or driving a horse, such as saddles, bridles, and harness; stable gear collectively.</p><p class="q">&#8220;save for the creaking of tack and the breathing of the horses&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tackroom"><b>tackroom</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tackrooms"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> a room for storing tack: saddles, bridles, and other riding gear.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He went down the shed to the tackroom and got his wretched saddle&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tailings"><b>tailings</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tailing"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The waste rock and mineral residue left over after ore has been processed to extract its valuable metal content; piled near mine or smelter sites.</p><p class="q">&#8220;great cones of slag and tailings&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Here used loosely for thin remnants or last traces of something; in mining the word refers to waste left after ore processing, but McCarthy extends it to mean narrow lingering streaks of old snow.</p><p class="q">&#8220;narrow tailings of old snow&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> The waste rock and residue left over after ore has been processed to extract its valuable minerals; typically piled or dumped near a mine entrance.</p><p class="q">&#8220;scarred with drifts and tailings&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tailorwise"><b>tailorwise</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tailorwised"/><idx:iform value="tailorwises"/><idx:iform value="tailorwising"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adverb)</i> <b>1.</b> Cross-legged, in the manner a tailor traditionally sits while sewing; tailor-fashion.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the old man was squatting by it tailorwise&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(adverb)</i> <b>2.</b> Sitting cross-legged, in the posture traditionally associated with a tailor at work; an archaic or dialectal equivalent of &#8220;Indian style.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Seated tailorwise in the eye of that cratered waste&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tainture"><b>tainture</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="taintures"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An archaic word meaning a stain, taint, or contamination; a residue of defilement left behind. From Middle English via French; first recorded in English around 1490.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they left behind a strange tainture like an afterimage on the eye&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="candles"><b>tallow candles</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tallow"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Candles made from rendered animal fat (tallow), cheaper and smokier than beeswax candles; the common lighting of frontier establishments.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a row of tallow candles that dripped and sputtered&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="talus"><b>talus</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="talu"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A geological term for the sloping mass of rock fragments that accumulates at the base of a cliff or steep rocky face through repeated rockfall.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the foreplain at the foot of a talus slope&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A sloping mass of rock fragments accumulated at the base of a cliff or steep slope.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The mules wheezed and scrabbled in the talus&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="slides"><b>talus slides</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="talus"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Accumulations of loose rock fragments that have broken away from a cliff or steep slope and piled up at its base; a talus slide is that debris in motion or recently shifted.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a rag of a man clambering toward him over the talus slides&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tamarind"><b>tamarind</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tamarinds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <em>Tamarindus indica</em>, a tropical tree bearing pods with a tart edible pulp; cultivated across Mexico and Central America.</p><p class="q">&#8220;orange and tamarind trees&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wagons"><b>tandem wagons</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tandem"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Wagons hitched one behind the other, the rear wagon serving as an additional trailer to haul extra loads.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the tandem wagons groaned away over the prairie&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tang"><b>tang</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tangs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The rearward-projecting metal tongue of a rifle&#8217;s action that extends into the buttstock to anchor it; on target rifles, the tang also provides the mounting point for the rear sight.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a vernier sight on the tang&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tank"><b>tank</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tanks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In the American Southwest: a natural rock basin or depression that collects and holds rainwater; a tinaja.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he found a tank deep under a pitch of boulders&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tantamount"><b>tantamount</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tantamountly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Equivalent in value or effect; here meaning goods of equal or exchangeable worth.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they carried no tantamount goods&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tanyard"><b>tanyard</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tanyards"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A yard or enclosure where raw hides are soaked in tannic acid to produce leather; tanyards were notoriously foul-smelling and usually sited outside towns near water.</p><p class="q">&#8220;I&#8217;d know your hide in a tanyard&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tapadero"><b>tapadero</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tapaderos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Literally &#8220;cover&#8221; or &#8220;lid,&#8221; from Spanish <em>tapar</em> (&#8220;to cover&#8221;); in tack, a leather hood fitted over the front of a stirrup to protect the rider&#8217;s foot. McCarthy uses the word here for the steel foot-armor (solerette) found among the ruins, applying it loosely to the armor&#8217;s foot-covering function.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a small steel tapadero frail and shelled with rot&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tapaderos"><b>tapaderos</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tapadero"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Leather hoods or covers that enclose the front and sides of stirrups, protecting the rider&#8217;s foot from brush and preventing the foot from slipping through; standard equipment for riders in thorny or brushy terrain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the veteran&#8217;s feet tucked into tapaderos slung nearly to the ground&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tariff"><b>tariff</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tariffs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Here used in its general sense of a charge or price for a service, not the governmental trade sense; the fee for passage with the company.</p><p class="q">&#8220;You find us some more fares and we&#8217;ll adjust your tariff accordingly&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tatterdemalion"><b>tatterdemalion</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tatterdemalionly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Ragged, tattered, and disreputable in appearance; a person or group dressed in tatters.</p><p class="q">&#8220;some tatterdemalion guard of honor&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="teamsters"><b>teamsters</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="teamster"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> men who drive teams of draft animals; wagon freighters and haulers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He wore long moustaches after the fashion of teamsters&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tectites"><b>tectites</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tectite"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Variant spelling of <em>tektites</em>: small glassy objects formed when a meteorite impact melts terrestrial rock, which is ejected and solidifies into aerodynamic pebbles of natural glass.</p><p class="q">&#8220;hail lay nested like tectites among the leaves&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tejanos"><b>Tejanos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Texans&#8221;; the Spanish word for people from Texas, historically applied first to Spanish-speaking Texan settlers and later, as here, to Anglo-American Texans as seen from a Mexican perspective.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Who can ride against the Tejanos?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="teleology"><b>teleology</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="teleologies"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The philosophical study of purpose, design, or final causes in nature; the doctrine that phenomena can be explained by their ends or goals rather than by prior causes.</p><p class="q">&#8220;teleology in the universe&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tempering"><b>tempering agent</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="agent"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> A substance added to another to harden or strengthen it; in metallurgy, the process of heating and cooling steel to increase toughness. The judge uses it figuratively: blood is what bonds (&#8220;tempers&#8221;) men together.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Is not blood the tempering agent in the mortar which bonds?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tenons"><b>tenons</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tenon"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In woodworking, projecting tongues cut at the end of a timber to fit into a matching slot (mortise) in another piece, forming a mortise-and-tenon joint; one of the oldest and strongest wood-joining methods.</p><p class="q">&#8220;pinned to the axletrees with tenons&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="damnata"><b>terra damnata</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="terra"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Latin)</i> Literally &#8220;condemned earth&#8221; or &#8220;damned ground&#8221;; an alchemical term for the worthless residue left after distillation &#8212; the earthy waste of a process. McCarthy applies it to a blasted, hellish landscape with no useful substance.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a terra damnata of smoking slag&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tertium"><b>Tertium quid</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="quid"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Latin)</i> Literally &#8220;a third something&#8221;; a thing that is neither one of two known or opposed things but partakes of or mediates between both &#8212; an unclassifiable third entity.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Tertium quid&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="thales"><b>Thales</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> Greek philosopher from Miletus (c. 624&#8211;546 BC), generally regarded as the first Western philosopher. He proposed that water is the primary substance underlying all matter, and was the first known thinker to offer natural rather than mythological explanations for physical phenomena.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He quoted &#8230; Anaximander, Thales.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="thaumaturge"><b>thaumaturge</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="thaumaturges"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A worker of wonders or miracles; a magician or wonder-worker. From Greek thauma (marvel) + ergon (work).</p><p class="q">&#8220;like some wild thaumaturge out of an atavistic drama&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="region"><b>the Afar region</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="afar"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> the Afar Triangle, a hot, geologically active lowland in northeastern Ethiopia that is one of the world&#8217;s richest sources of early-human (hominin) fossils.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;the Afar region of northern Ethiopia&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="beehive"><b>The Beehive</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> A well-known saloon and dance hall in the Fort Griffin settlement, notorious in the late 1870s as a center of gambling, drinking, and prostitution.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The Beehive&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="father"><b>the child the father of the man</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="child"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(allusion)</i> an echo of Wordsworth&#8217;s line &#8220;The Child is father of the Man,&#8221; meaning that childhood forms and determines the adult one becomes.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;the child the father of the man.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="delawares"><b>The Delawares</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> Members of the Lenape (Delaware) Nation, an Algonquian-speaking people originally from the northeastern United States who by the mid-19th century had dispersed widely into the West, where many worked as highly regarded scouts, guides, and fighters for hire.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The Delawares return&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dipper"><b>the Dipper</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> the Big Dipper, the seven bright stars that form a ladle shape within the constellation Ursa Major.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The Dipper stove.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="float"><b>the float</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> the flatboat or timber raft itself, floated one-way downstream; on arrival such craft were broken apart and their planking sold as lumber.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They break up the float and sell the lumber&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="host"><b>the host</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The consecrated Eucharist&#8212;the bread believed in Catholic teaching to be the body of Christ&#8212;being carried to a dying person (the viaticum).</p><p class="q">&#8220;taking the host to some soul&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="leonids"><b>the Leonids</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> a meteor shower that returns each November; on the night of November 12&#8211;13, 1833 it became a storm over North America, with tens of thousands of meteors an hour, long remembered as &#8220;the night the stars fell.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;The Leonids they were called. God how the stars did fall.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="stone"><b>the old stone fort</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fort"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> almost certainly the Old Stone Fort of Nacogdoches, a stone trading house built about 1779 that served over the years as store, town hall, and fort, and stood through the 1800s.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;they went sucking out past the old stone fort along the road west.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="republic"><b>the republic of Fredonia</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fredonia"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place / historical)</i> a short-lived breakaway republic declared by Anglo-American settlers at Nacogdoches in December 1826; it collapsed within weeks when Mexican and Texian forces moved in.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;the latterday republic of Fredonia into the town of Nacogdoches.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="daily"><b>The Yuma Daily Sun</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="yuma"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(publication)</i> a daily newspaper published in Yuma, Arizona.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the yuma daily sun, June 13, 1982&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="thespian"><b>thespian</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="thespianly"/><idx:iform value="thespians"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun/adjective)</i> An actor; relating to drama or theatrical performance. From Thespis, the legendary founder of Greek drama.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he was a passable thespian&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="thews"><b>thews</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="thew"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Archaic plural: sinews or tendons; here used literally as strips of sinew or rawhide used as thread or cord to stitch hides together.</p><p class="q">&#8220;clad in the skins of animals stitched up with thews&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="thimbles"><b>thimbles</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="thimble"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Small metal loops or rings fitted along the underside of a rifle barrel that hold the ramrod in place when not in use.</p><p class="q">&#8220;slid the ramrod from the thimbles&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="thrapple"><b>thrapple</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="thrapples"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Scottish dialectal word for the throat or windpipe; gullet.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the old man raised the axe and split the head of John Joel Glanton to the thrapple&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="thunderheads"><b>thunderheads</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="thunderhead"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The anvil-shaped tops of cumulonimbus (thunderstorm) clouds, which billow upward to the tropopause and then spread into a flattened anvil shape.</p><p class="q">&#8220;beyond the midnight thunderheads&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="thunderstones"><b>thunderstones</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="thunderstone"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Prehistoric stone tools (hand axes, arrowheads, or flint implements) which in folk tradition were believed to have fallen from the sky during thunderstorms as bolts from a thunder god.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they crossed a bed of thunderstones clustered on that heath&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="thwart"><b>thwart</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="thwarts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A transverse seat or crosspiece in an open boat, running from one side to the other; used as a seat for rowers and as a structural brace.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he&#8230; stepped aboard the thwart and balanced there&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bastante"><b>Tiene oro? &#8230; Si &#8230; Cuanto &#8230; Bastante &#8230; Bueno &#8230; Tres dias. Aqui. Un barril de whiskey</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="barril"/><idx:iform value="bueno"/><idx:iform value="cuanto"/><idx:iform value="dias"/><idx:iform value="tiene"/><idx:iform value="tres"/><idx:iform value="whiskey"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Do you have gold? &#8230; Yes &#8230; How much &#8230; Enough &#8230; Good &#8230; Three days. Here. A barrel of whiskey.&#8221; <em>Tiene oro</em> = do you have gold; <em>cu&#225;nto</em> = how much; <em>bastante</em> = enough, plenty; <em>tres d&#237;as</em> = three days; <em>aqu&#237;</em> = here; <em>un barril</em> = a barrel.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Tiene oro? &#8230; Bastante &#8230; Tres dias. Aqui. Un barril de whiskey.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="desamparadas"><b>Tierras quebradas, tierras desamparadas</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="quebradas"/><idx:iform value="tierras"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Broken lands, forsaken lands.&#8221; <em>Tierras</em> = lands; <em>quebradas</em> = broken, shattered (from <em>quebrar</em>, to break); <em>desamparadas</em> = abandoned, forsaken, unprotected (from <em>desamparar</em>, to abandon).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Tierras quebradas, tierras desamparadas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="despobladas"><b>Tierras quemadas, tierras despobladas</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="quemadas"/><idx:iform value="tierras"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Burned lands, uninhabited lands.&#8221; A paired phrase describing the scorched, depopulated interior of northern Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Tierras quemadas, tierras despobladas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tigre"><b>tigre-skin</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="skin"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Made from the skin of a jaguar (Spanish <em>tigre</em> in northern Mexico refers to the jaguar, not a tiger).</p><p class="q">&#8220;the tigre-skin warbag&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tiguas"><b>Tiguas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> A Pueblo people originally from the Rio Grande valley of New Mexico who resettled near present-day El Paso after the Pueblo Revolt of 1680; one of three federally recognized tribes in Texas.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Massacre of the Tiguas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="white"><b>Tim D. White</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun / person)</i> an American paleoanthropologist at UC Berkeley known for the study of early-human fossils from the Afar.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;UC Berkeley colleague Tim D. White&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tinajas"><b>Tinajas Altas</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="altas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A series of natural granite water tanks carved into a steep defile in the Tinajas Altas Mountains of southwestern Arizona, near the Camino del Diablo. A rare reliable water source on the otherwise waterless desert route toward the Colorado River, and a critical watering place for travelers during the 1849 California gold rush.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The Tinajas Altas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tinctures"><b>tinctures</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tincture"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Hues or shades of color &#8212; with an archaic or heraldic connotation (in heraldry, tinctures are the prescribed colors of a coat of arms). Here means gradations of color in the dawn sky.</p><p class="q">&#8220;veering out through tinctures of rose and the dark beyond the dawn&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tinder"><b>tinder</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tinders"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> dry, easily lit material used to catch a spark and start a fire.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Need a little tinder here&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tires"><b>tires</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tire"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Iron rims fitted around wooden wagon wheels to protect them; the archaic spelling and sense predating rubber pneumatic tires.</p><p class="q">&#8220;hoop-iron and tires, the redhot axles&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tiswin"><b>tiswin</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tiswins"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A fermented alcoholic drink made by the Apache and other southwestern peoples, brewed from sprouted corn ground and boiled, then fermented; typically low in alcohol (2&#8211;5% ABV). Produced communally and drunk at social gatherings.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They were drunk on tiswin they&#8217;d brewed&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tlacos"><b>tlacos</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tlaco"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Small copper coins worth one-eighth of a real, the lowest denomination in circulation in colonial and early republican Mexico; by the 1840s they were near-worthless and often used as tips or minimal payments.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Toadvine pushed the few tlacos toward the barman&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="muertos"><b>Todos muertos</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="todos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;All dead&#8221; or &#8220;they are all dead&#8221;; the judge&#8217;s feigned lament shouted to the approaching Apache to lower their guard.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Todos muertos. Todos.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="toledo"><b>Toledo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="toledos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A city in central Spain historically famous since the medieval period for the production of fine steel weapons and armor.</p><p class="q">&#8220;hammered out in a shop in Toledo three centuries before&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>
