<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf">
<head><meta charset="utf-8"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="dict.css"/></head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jacks"><b>jacks</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jack"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Male donkeys or jackasses; here small pack animals used to carry whiskey and provisions.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Behind him on a string were two small jacks laden with whiskey and biscuit.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="boehme"><b>Jacob Boehme</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jacob"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun / person)</i> German Christian mystic (1575&#8211;1624), a shoemaker whose visionary writings on God, nature, and evil influenced later religious and Romantic thought. The passage is from his <em>Six Theosophic Points</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;jacob boehme&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jakes"><b>jakes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jake"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun, archaic)</i> <b>1.</b> an outdoor privy; an outhouse.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;down toward the batboard jakes at the bottom of the lot.&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> An outhouse or outdoor privy.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The jakes and what was encountered there&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="janos"><b>Janos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> An ancient walled town and presidio (Spanish colonial fort) in northern Chihuahua, Mexico; the Presidio de San Felipe y Santiago de Janos was established in 1686 as a key Spanish defense against Apache raids.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The town of Janos&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jasper"><b>jasper</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jaspers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An opaque, fine-grained variety of quartz, typically red, yellow, or brown, found in desert terrain; a hard semi-precious stone.</p><p class="q">&#8220;cobbled up from tiny blocks of jasper, carnelian, agate&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="javelina"><b>javelina</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="javelinas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The collared peccary (<em>Pecari tajacu</em>), a pig-like hoofed mammal native to the American Southwest and Mexico, distinct from true pigs; typically hunted for meat throughout the region.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the stiff bodies of deer and javelina and ducks and quail&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="javelinas"><b>javelinas</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="javelina"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The collared peccary (*Pecari tajacu*), a pig-like hoofed mammal native to the desert Southwest and Latin America; not a true pig but a separate New World family (Tayassuidae), recognized by its musk gland, grizzled gray coat, and white collar.</p><p class="q">&#8220;following the small demonic tracks of javelinas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jeda"><b>Jeda</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jedas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> An archaic spelling of Jedda (Jeddah), the Red Sea port city in the Hejaz, western Arabia; the British government officially used &#8220;Jedda&#8221; until 2007. Paired with Babylon to suggest creatures that exist the same in every ancient desert city across time.</p><p class="q">&#8220;silent and the same, in Jeda, in Babylon&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jefe"><b>jefe</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jefes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Chief, boss, or leader; from Old French <em>chief</em>, Latin <em>caput</em> (head).</p><p class="q">&#8220;this selfsame son of a bitch is down there with the guards &#8230; him and the jefe&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jerked"><b>jerked</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jerk"/><idx:iform value="jerke"/><idx:iform value="jerkeded"/><idx:iform value="jerkeding"/><idx:iform value="jerkeds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Preserved by cutting into strips and drying or curing; to make jerky.</p><p class="q">&#8220;jerked and divided the meat&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jerkline"><b>jerkline</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jerklines"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A single long rein running from the driver&#8217;s hand to the bit of the lead animal in a multi-ox team; jerking it signals left or right turns to the whole string.</p><p class="q">&#8220;driving with a jerkline and a jockeystick&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jerky"><b>jerky</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jerkies"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Meat that has been sliced thin and dried (by sun, wind, or smoke) to preserve it; from Spanish <em>charqui</em>, itself from Quechua <em>ch&#8217;arki</em>. A staple preserved food of the frontier. Here used figuratively: &#8220;dried to jerky&#8221; means shriveled and desiccated from heat and thirst.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Lord we are dried to jerky down here&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="maría"><b>Jes&#250;s Mar&#237;a</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jesus"/><idx:iform value="jesús"/><idx:iform value="maria"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A real small mining town in the Sierra Madre, on the Chihuahua-Sinaloa border region of Mexico, situated in a deep mountain gorge.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they rode into the old stone town of Jesus Maria&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jetsam"><b>jetsam</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jetsams"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Goods or debris thrown overboard or swept away by water; here applied to debris lodged in cliff crevices by ancient floodwaters.</p><p class="q">&#8220;nests of straw and jetsam from old high waters&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jockeystick"><b>jockeystick</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jockeysticks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A rigid rod fastened between the hame of one animal and the bit of the animal beside it, keeping the pair properly spaced when driven by a single rein.</p><p class="q">&#8220;driving with a jerkline and a jockeystick&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="glanton"><b>John Joel Glanton</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="joel"/><idx:iform value="john"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> (c. 1819&#8211;April 23, 1850) Texas Ranger and leader of the Glanton Gang, a notorious band of scalp hunters contracted by the Mexican state of Sonora in 1849; he seized the Yuma Crossing ferry and ran it by robbery and terror until the Quechan uprising killed him.</p><p class="q">&#8220;split the head of John Joel Glanton to the thrapple&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jornadas"><b>jornadas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> Day&#8217;s journeys; in the Southwest specifically, long dry crossings between water sources &#8212; often dangerous or fatal if miscalculated. The most notorious was the <em>Jornada del Muerto</em> (&#8220;Journey of the Dead Man&#8221;) in New Mexico, a 90-mile waterless stretch.</p><p class="q">&#8220;silent jornadas save for the trundling of the wagons&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> Waterless desert stretches requiring a forced march; from Spanish <em>jornada</em> = a day&#8217;s journey. In southwestern travel, a jornada was a long, arid passage with no water, typically crossed in one hard, continuous drive.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the first of a series of jornadas where there would be no water at all&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="joshua"><b>Joshua trees</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="trees"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Large, branching yucca plants (Yucca brevifolia) native to the Mojave Desert and surrounding highlands, with spiky clusters of leaves and a distinctive silhouette; they can grow to 40 feet tall.</p><p class="q">&#8220;forested with Joshua trees&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jousting"><b>jousting</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="joust"/><idx:iform value="jouste"/><idx:iform value="joustinged"/><idx:iform value="joustinging"/><idx:iform value="joustings"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb/noun)</i> Competing with lances in a medieval tournament; here used figuratively for men sparring and thrusting their skewer-sticks over the coals as if with lances, each fighting for position to cook or grab meat. Borrowed from the tournament term.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a jousting over the coals with shaven sticks&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="joven"><b>Joven</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jovens"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Young man&#8221; or &#8220;young person&#8221;; used as a form of address.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Joven, said the judge&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="judas"><b>Judas</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="juda"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(allusion)</i> Judas Iscariot, the apostle who betrayed Jesus for thirty pieces of silver according to the Gospels; here invoked through the Latin American Easter tradition (Quema del Jud&#225;s) in which a straw effigy of Judas stuffed with fireworks is publicly burned or exploded on Holy Saturday.</p><p class="q">&#8220;hanging from a scaffold a poor Judas fashioned from straw and old rags&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="judas"><b>judas hole</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hole"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A small peephole in a prison cell door through which a guard can observe the prisoner without being seen; named after Judas Iscariot&#8217;s association with betrayal and secrecy.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He rose up from the straw and put one eye to the judas hole&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="holden"><b>Judge Holden</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="judge"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> the novel&#8217;s Judge Holden is drawn from a man of the same name in Samuel Chamberlain&#8217;s mid-1800s memoir <em>My Confession</em>, a firsthand account of the Texas&#8211;Mexico borderlands; Chamberlain describes a giant, wholly hairless, and formidably learned man called Holden.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Judge Holden&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jurisprudence"><b>jurisprudence</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jurisprudences"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The theory, philosophy, or science of law; the body of legal principles and their systematic study.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the judge translated for him latin terms of jurisprudence&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="juzgado"><b>juzgado</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="juzgados"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> A court of law or courthouse; loosely used for a local jail or lockup attached to the courthouse.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Yes he&#8217;s here. In the juzgado.&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> Literally &#8220;judged&#8221; (past participle of <em>juzgar</em>, to judge); the courthouse or court of law, by extension the jail housed in the same building; borrowed into American English slang as &#8220;hoosegow.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;We heard you were in the juzgado&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="karankawas"><b>Karankawas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> A group of coastal tribal peoples who inhabited the Texas Gulf Coast from Galveston Bay to Corpus Christi; they had a widely reported &#8212; and largely exaggerated &#8212; reputation for cannibalism, and by the 1850s were effectively extinct as a distinct people.</p><p class="q">&#8220;deputations of Karankawas tall and austere, their faces dyed blue&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="katabasis"><b>Katabasis</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun / Greek)</i> From Greek <em>katabaino</em>, &#8220;to go down&#8221;: a descent, especially the archetypal literary descent into the underworld and return.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The Katabasis&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="keelsons"><b>keelsons</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="keelson"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Internal longitudinal beams running above a ship&#8217;s keel, bolted to the floor timbers to stiffen the hull; the backbone inside the hull. Here the exposed wagon axletrees are compared to keelsons that reveal the skeletal structure of a wrecked ship.</p><p class="q">&#8220;as keelsons do the bones of ships on the sea&#8217;s floors&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="seel"><b>Keet seel</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="keet"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun / place)</i> A well-preserved Ancestral Puebloan cliff dwelling in Navajo National Monument, Arizona, occupied roughly 1250&#8211;1300 CE; the name means &#8220;broken pottery scattered around&#8221; in Navajo.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Keet seel&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="kerfs"><b>kerfs</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="kerf"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Slots or cuts in a surface &#8212; in a geological/stone context, narrow fissures or saw-like cuts in rock, whether natural or quarried. From the sense of the groove left by a saw or cutting tool.</p><p class="q">&#8220;particolored stone upthrust in ragged kerfs&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="boots"><b>kid boots</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Boots made of kidskin, the soft leather from the hide of a young goat; prized for its suppleness and fine grain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;feet were encased in nicely polished gray kid boots&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="kitbag"><b>kitbag</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="kitbags"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A sturdy cylindrical canvas bag used by soldiers and travellers to carry personal kit and supplies; a kit-bag or duffel bag.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He&#8217;d an old canvas kitbag&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="kitchenhouse"><b>kitchenhouse</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="kitchenhouses"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> a kitchen built as a separate outbuilding from the main house, common on older Southern farms.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;the freezing kitchenhouse in the predawn dark.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="kivas"><b>kivas</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="kiva"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Circular, usually subterranean ceremonial chambers built by Ancestral Pueblo peoples and still used by modern Pueblo communities for religious and social purposes; from Hopi, &#8220;ceremonial room.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;He roamed through the ruinous kivas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="knacker"><b>knacker&#8217;s yard</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="yard"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> A facility where old or dead horses and livestock are slaughtered and rendered into by-products such as glue, tallow, and bone meal.</p><p class="q">&#8220;like bloated swine in a knacker&#8217;s yard&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="knappings"><b>knappings</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="knapping"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Chips and flakes of flint or stone produced by knapping&#8212;the process of striking stone to shape tools or weapons; debris from toolmaking.</p><p class="q">&#8220;knappings of flint or quartzite&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="adivinar"><b>La baraja &#8230; Para adivinar la suerte</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="baraja"/><idx:iform value="suerte"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;The deck of cards &#8230; To tell fortunes.&#8221; <em>La baraja</em> = the card deck (specifically the Spanish-suited deck); <em>adivinar la suerte</em> = to divine one&#8217;s luck or fate.</p><p class="q">&#8220;La baraja &#8230; Para adivinar la suerte.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="invertido"><b>La carroza &#8230; Invertido &#8230; Carta de guerra, de venganza</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="carroza"/><idx:iform value="carta"/><idx:iform value="guerra"/><idx:iform value="venganza"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;The chariot &#8230; Inverted &#8230; A card of war, of vengeance.&#8221; The old woman&#8217;s reading of Glanton&#8217;s card: the Chariot (a tarot major arcana card of conquest and forward movement) in its reversed position, signifying destruction.</p><p class="q">&#8220;La carroza &#8230; Invertido. Carta de guerra, de venganza.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="muchas"><b>La gente dice que el coyote es un brujo. Muchas veces el brujo es un coyote.</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="brujo"/><idx:iform value="coyote"/><idx:iform value="dice"/><idx:iform value="gente"/><idx:iform value="veces"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;People say the coyote is a sorcerer. Many times the sorcerer is a coyote.&#8221; (<em>Brujo</em> = shaman or witch; the passage draws on the Mexican folk belief that sorcerers can transform into coyotes.)</p><p class="q">&#8220;La gente dice que el coyote es un brujo&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="obscuro"><b>La vi sin ruedas sobre un r&#237;o obscuro</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ruedas"/><idx:iform value="sobre"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;I saw it without wheels upon a dark river.&#8221; The beldam&#8217;s vision of the Chariot card stripped of its wheels and floating on a dark river.</p><p class="q">&#8220;La vi sin ruedas sobre un r&#237;o obscuro&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="lambasted"><b>lambasted</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="lambast"/><idx:iform value="lambaste"/><idx:iform value="lambasteded"/><idx:iform value="lambasteding"/><idx:iform value="lambasteds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> beat or struck hard (also: scolded harshly).</p><p class="q">&#8220;He balled his fist and lambasted the door about five times.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="lampblack"><b>lampblack</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="lampblacks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A fine, intensely black pigment made from the soot of burning oils or resins; composed almost entirely of carbon and used for centuries in paints, inks, and stains.</p><p class="q">&#8220;his coffin, made from rawhide blacked with lampblack&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A fine, intensely black pigment of nearly pure carbon, made by collecting soot from the incomplete combustion of oils or resins; used in inks and paint.</p><p class="q">&#8220;tracings of lampblack fallen in a beaker&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="lanneret"><b>lanneret</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="lannerets"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The male of the lanner falcon (<em>Falco biarmicus</em>), a medium-sized Old World falcon; in falconry, males of many falcon species are smaller than females and named by diminutive terms.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A small gray lanneret flew about them&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="laredito"><b>Laredito</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="lareditos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A historic Mexican-American barrio (neighborhood) in San Antonio, Texas, situated along Laredo Street west of San Pedro Creek; its name derives from the road leading south toward the Rio Grande and the city of Laredo.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A cantina in the Laredito&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="larval"><b>larval</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="larvally"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Of or like a larva &#8212; the immature, undeveloped pre-metamorphic stage of a creature; McCarthy uses it to mean existing in a primitive, formless state, as yet unrecognizable as whatever it will eventually become.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Bald and pale and bloated, larval to some unreckonable being&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tiempo"><b>Las diez y media, tiempo sere&#241;o.</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="diez"/><idx:iform value="media"/><idx:iform value="sereno"/><idx:iform value="sereño"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Ten-thirty, clear weather&#8221;; the sereno&#8217;s traditional street call announcing the time and the state of the night sky to residents.</p><p class="q">&#8220;It called: Las diez y media, tiempo sere&#241;o.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="yumas"><b>Las Yumas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;The Yumas&#8221;; a reference to the Quechan (Yuma) people, a tribe living along the lower Colorado River, historically known as fierce warriors.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Las Yumas, he said&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ánimas"><b>Las &#193;nimas</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="animas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;The Souls&#8221; &#8212; the Catholic feast of All Souls (November 2), commemorating the faithful departed, marked by processions, prayers at cemeteries, and Masses for the dead.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The day that followed was the feast of Las Animas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="latterday"><b>latterday</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="latterdayly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> of recent or present times; modern.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;the latterday republic of Fredonia&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="laved"><b>laved</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="lav"/><idx:iform value="lave"/><idx:iform value="laveded"/><idx:iform value="laveding"/><idx:iform value="laveds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Washed or bathed (archaic); poured water over so as to cleanse or cool.</p><p class="q">&#8220;laved water over his burnt and peeling skull&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="lazarous"><b>lazarous</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="lazarou"/><idx:iform value="lazarously"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Afflicted with squalor or disease; resembling a lazar (a leper or sick pauper). McCarthy uses this form as an archaic adjective to evoke a wretched, pestilent establishment.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They spent the afternoon drinking in a lazarous bodega&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sargento"><b>Le presento al sargento Aguilar</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="aguilar"/><idx:iform value="presento"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Allow me to introduce Sergeant Aguilar&#8221; (formal register).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Le presento al sargento Aguilar&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="leader"><b>leader</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="leaders"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Archaic: a tendon or sinew; here a strip of rawhide or sinew used as a lace or drawstring.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the toes gathered shut with leader&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="legatees"><b>legatees</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="legatee"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Persons who inherit a bequest; heirs to something passed down. Here used figuratively: the riders as inheritors of an ancient, blood-borne order.</p><p class="q">&#8220;blood legatees of an order&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="lemniscate"><b>lemniscate</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="lemniscates"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A figure-eight or infinity-symbol (&#8734;) shaped curve in mathematics; from Latin <em>lemniscatus</em>, &#8220;decorated with ribbons.&#8221; Here it describes the double-circle formed by the two paired muzzle-bores of a double-barreled rifle seen head-on.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the black lemniscate that was the paired bores of Glanton&#8217;s doublerifle&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="lemur"><b>lemur</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="lemurs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A nocturnal primate native to Madagascar, with large eyes, a pointed snout, and long limbs; here used to describe the crouching, scrabbling posture of the idiot on all fours.</p><p class="q">&#8220;some naked species of lemur&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="levees"><b>levees</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="levee"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Raised embankments built to hold back floodwaters; used figuratively here for the enormous curving walls of stacked bones.</p><p class="q">&#8220;great levees of them curving away over the plain&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="liens"><b>liens</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="lien"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Legal claims on property or assets as security for a debt; here used figuratively for causal obligations or cosmic debts.</p><p class="q">&#8220;No liens, no creditors?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="lieutenant"><b>Lieutenant Couts</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="couts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> Cave Johnson Couts (1821&#8211;1874), U.S. Army officer, West Point class of 1843. He traveled through the Santa Cruz Valley and Tucson in 1848&#8211;1849 on the march from Monterrey to California after the Mexican War, keeping a diary that is a primary source for the region in exactly this period.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Lieutenant Couts&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ligaments"><b>ligaments</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ligament"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Here: sinew or tendon used as thread for sewing hides together; the fibrous connecting tissue of animals, dried and used as cordage by indigenous peoples.</p><p class="q">&#8220;dressed in skins sewn with the ligaments of beasts&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="lighter"><b>lighter</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="lighters"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun, nautical)</i> a flat-bottomed barge used to carry passengers or cargo between a moored ship and the shore.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They disembark aboard a lighter&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="limber"><b>limber-teams</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="teams"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The horse teams attached to limbers&#8212;two-wheeled carriages used to tow artillery pieces&#8212;along with the limbers themselves.</p><p class="q">&#8220;limber-teams and all&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="lipan"><b>Lipan</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="lipans"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> The Lipan Apache, a band of Apache people who ranged across present-day Texas and northern Mexico, known for raiding and for resistance to both Spanish colonial and later Mexican authority.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The Lipan burial&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="indians"><b>Lipan Indians</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="lipan"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> The Lipan Apache, an Athabaskan-speaking people and the easternmost of the Apache groups, who ranged across Texas and into northern Mexico; by the mid-19th century they were being displaced by Comanche pressure from the north and Anglo-American settlement.</p><p class="q">&#8220;slaves and Lipan Indians&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="colorado"><b>Little Colorado</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="little"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A tributary of the Colorado River flowing through northeastern Arizona, crossing terrain then disputed between Anglo-American forces and Apache bands.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The skirmish on the Little Colorado&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="littoral"><b>littoral</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="littorally"/><idx:iform value="littorals"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun / adjective)</i> The area of land along the shore of a river, lake, or sea; the shoreline zone and its fringe of vegetation.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Glanton and his riders defiled out of the wooded littoral upriver&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="live"><b>live oak</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Any of several species of evergreen oak (especially Quercus virginiana) common across the American South and Southwest, retaining leaves year-round.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He passed through a forest of live oak&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="livery"><b>livery</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="liveries"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> a distinctive uniform or dress, especially that of a servant or office-holder; here, clerical garb.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;while actually clothed in the livery of his God.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="llano"><b>Llano</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="llanos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> <b>1.</b> The Llano Estacado (&#8220;Staked Plains&#8221;), a vast, flat, semiarid plateau in West Texas and eastern New Mexico, here referred to informally as &#8220;the Llano.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;one old boy up on the Llano near the dutch settlements&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> <b>2.</b> Short for <em>Llano Estacado</em> (&#8220;Staked Plain&#8221; in Spanish), the vast, nearly featureless high plateau of the Texas and New Mexico panhandle region; here referring to the open plains country.</p><p class="q">&#8220;cut a parcel of crazy pilgrims down off the Llano&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="llegaran"><b>Llegaran</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="llegarans"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> As written in the text (without accent), the form is past subjunctive of llegar (&#8220;to arrive&#8221;), but the kid uses it here in the sense of the future: &#8220;They will arrive.&#8221; The spoken frontier Spanish of the novel commonly drops accent marks.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Llegaran. Muchos companeros.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="loam"><b>loam</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="loams"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Rich, fertile soil composed of a mixture of sand, silt, and clay; often dark and crumbly in texture.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a bonfire on the bench of loam where the gibbet stood&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="lobations"><b>lobations</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="lobation"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Rounded lobes or lobe-shaped divisions; here describing the organic-looking rounded shapes formed naturally in native copper nuggets as they grow.</p><p class="q">&#8220;native nuggets in whose organic lobations&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="lobo"><b>lobo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="lobos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Wolf (Spanish); here referring specifically to a large gray timber wolf, <em>lobo</em> being a common regional name in the Southwest for the Mexican gray wolf.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a solitary lobo, perhaps gray at the muzzle&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="lobos"><b>lobos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> Wolves (plural of <em>lobo</em>, from Latin <em>lupus</em>). The great plains wolf (<em>Canis lupus nubilus</em>) was commonly called the lobo wolf in the Southwest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;great pale lobos with yellow eyes&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> Wolves; specifically, in this context, the Mexican gray wolf (<em>Canis lupus baileyi</em>), the subspecies historically native to the deserts and mountains of the American Southwest and northern Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;We left little more than bones for the lobos&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="locks"><b>locks</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="lock"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The firing mechanisms of flintlock muskets or rifles; &#8220;picking powder in the locks&#8221; means forcing powder into the priming pans of the enemy&#8217;s weapons to cause them to misfire or blow open.</p><p class="q">&#8220;We picked powder in the locks yonder.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="locus"><b>locus</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="locu"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Latin for &#8220;place&#8221;; in general use, the fixed point or center of something; here, the two figures are the sole point of reference on the featureless plain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;of them were they locus&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="looms"><b>looms</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="loom"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Here, large indistinct shapes or columns rising into the air; an archaic and poetic use meaning vague, towering masses.</p><p class="q">&#8220;under looms of smoke from the underground coal deposits&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="loopholed"><b>loopholed</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="loopholedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Pierced with loopholes: narrow slots in a wall through which defenders can fire weapons while remaining sheltered.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The houses were loopholed and parapeted&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ahorcados"><b>Los ahorcados</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;The hanged ones&#8221; or &#8220;the hanged men&#8221;; from Spanish <em>ahorcar</em>, to hang.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Los ahorcados&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="caballeros"><b>Los caballeros</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;The gentlemen&#8221; or &#8220;The lords&#8221;; <em>caballero</em> literally means horseman or knight; used as a polite form of address for men.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Los caballeros, he said.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dieguénos"><b>Los Diegu&#233;nos</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dieguenos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;The San Diegans&#8221;; the Spanish colonial name for the Kumeyaay, an indigenous people of southern California and northern Baja California whose territory extended south of the San Luis Rey River.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;Los Diegu&#233;nos&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="heréticos"><b>Los her&#233;ticos</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hereticos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;The heretics&#8221;; those who reject accepted religious doctrine.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Los her&#233;ticos&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pordioseros"><b>Los pordioseros</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;The beggars.&#8221; From <em>por Dios</em> (&#8220;for God&#8217;s sake&#8221;), the plea beggars used when imploring alms.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Los pordioseros&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="israelites"><b>lost tribes of Israelites</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="lost"/><idx:iform value="tribes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(allusion)</i> The ten Hebrew tribes exiled by Assyria c. 722 BCE and subsequently lost to history; they became a frequent motif in 19th-century pseudoscientific speculation about the origins of non-European peoples.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the lost tribes of Israelites&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="luffed"><b>luffed</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="luff"/><idx:iform value="luffe"/><idx:iform value="luffeded"/><idx:iform value="luffeding"/><idx:iform value="luffeds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Flapped or billowed violently; from sailing, where a sail is said to luff when wind strikes it from the wrong angle and makes it shake uncontrollably.</p><p class="q">&#8220;stood towering, luffed and wrapped them about&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="lugubrious"><b>lugubrious</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="lugubriou"/><idx:iform value="lugubriously"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Excessively mournful or dismal in tone; here describing a dolefully slow or melancholy tune.</p><p class="q">&#8220;struck up a lugubrious air in one corner&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="lunar"><b>lunar dome</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dome"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> Moon-like rounded surface; here describing the judge&#8217;s bald, pale, sphere-shaped skull glowing under the lamps.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the lunar dome of his skull passes palely under the lamps&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="madre"><b>Madre de Dios</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dios"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Mother of God&#8221;; a Catholic exclamation of distress or horror invoking the Virgin Mary.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Madre de Dios, he called.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="madre"><b>Madre de Jesus</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jesus"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Mother of Jesus&#8221;; a Catholic exclamation of fear or anguish, equivalent to &#8220;Mother of God!&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Madre de Jesus. No here.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="madstone"><b>madstone</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="madstones"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A bezoar: a stony concretion (typically of compressed hair and fiber) found in the stomach of a ruminant animal, believed in frontier folk medicine to draw out the poison of a snakebite or mad-dog bite when pressed against the wound.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a calculus or madstone from the inward parts of some beast&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="maelstrom"><b>maelstrom</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="maelstroms"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A powerful whirlpool; figuratively, any overwhelming and destructive vortex or force.</p><p class="q">&#8220;sucked by some maelstrom out there in the void&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="maguey"><b>maguey</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="magueys"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> The agave plant; a large succulent desert plant with thick, spiny leaves and an immense central flowering stalk, used for food, fiber, and fermented drink. McCarthy glosses it in the text as &#8220;the aloe or century plant.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;strange forests of maguey&#8212;the aloe or century plant&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="graham"><b>Major Graham</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="major"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> Major Lawrence Pike Graham, U.S. Army officer who in 1848 commanded a column of dragoons marching from Monterrey, Mexico, through this region to California; his wagons and equipment were abandoned or reassigned at the Colorado River crossing.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the pair of freightwagons he&#8217;d inherited from Major Graham&#8217;s command&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="malabarista"><b>malabarista</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="malabaristas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> A juggler or acrobat; from <em>malabar</em>, derived from Malabar (southwest India), a region historically associated with skilled street performers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The old malabarista was on his knees&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> A juggler or conjurer; one who performs sleight of hand or juggling acts. From Malabar, a region of southwestern India historically noted for its acrobats and jugglers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he was himself a cunning old malabarista&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="malandered"><b>malandered</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="malanderedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Afflicted with <em>malanders</em> &#8212; a chronic scurfy eruption or eczema in the bend of a horse&#8217;s foreleg at the back of the knee; from Middle French <em>malandre</em>, Latin <em>malandria</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;mounted on little malandered mules&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="malpais"><b>malpais</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> Literally &#8220;bad country&#8221; (<em>mal</em> = bad, <em>pa&#237;s</em> = country); in the American Southwest, a field of rough, largely uneroded lava with sharp edges and a treacherous surface, nearly impassable on foot or horseback.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The malpais&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> Bad country; a rough, broken lava field of sharp, jagged basaltic rock nearly impassable on foot or horseback. From Spanish <em>mal pa&#237;s</em> = bad land. Used as a topographical term in the American Southwest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they crossed the malpais afoot&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="manada"><b>manada</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="manadas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> A herd or band of horses; specifically, a breeding band consisting of a stallion with his mares and young stock.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The ghost manada&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="manatee"><b>manatee</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="manatees"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A large, slow-moving aquatic mammal (order Sirenia) of tropical coastal waters and rivers, with a rounded body and paddle-like flippers; often called a sea cow.</p><p class="q">&#8220;like some pale and bloated manatee surfaced in a bog&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="manciple"><b>manciple</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="manciples"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An archaic term for a steward or purveyor responsible for purchasing provisions; McCarthy uses it ironically for the idiot, who is led on a lead like a pack animal serving the judge.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he and his drooling manciple&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mangas"><b>Mangas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> Mangas Coloradas (c. 1793&#8211;1863), principal war chief of the Mimbr&#241;o (Warm Springs) Apache, whose territory centered on the Mimbres Mountains of present-day southwestern New Mexico. The name is Spanish for &#8220;red sleeves.&#8221; He was the most influential Apache leader of his era and father-in-law of Cochise.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Mangas and his lieutenants exchanged dark looks&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="colorado"><b>Mangas Colorado</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mangas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> Mangas Coloradas (c. 1795&#8211;1863), principal war chief of the Mimbre&#241;o (Coppermine) Apache in present-day southwestern New Mexico. The name is Spanish for &#8220;red sleeves.&#8221; Standing roughly six feet six inches, he was a towering figure who became the most influential Apache leader of his era and father-in-law of Cochise.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Mangas Colorado&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mansuete"><b>mansuete</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mansuetes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective / Latin)</i> Tame, gentle, or domesticated; in legal usage (<em>mansuetae naturae</em>), referring to animals that are by nature tame and kept under human ownership, such as horses &#8212; relevant to the judge&#8217;s argument about property rights in the dead animals.</p><p class="q">&#8220;those laws pertaining to property rights in beasts mansuete&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mantle"><b>mantle</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mantles"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A loose, sleeveless cloak or wrap worn over other garments; here a long piece of free-flowing cloth draped around the body.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He was wrapped in a mantle of freeflowing cloth beneath which he was naked.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="imbrium"><b>mare imbrium</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mare"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Latin)</i> &#8220;Sea of Showers&#8221;; one of the large dark lava plains (maria) visible on the near side of the Moon, appearing smooth and dark from Earth and named by seventeenth-century astronomers who mistook these plains for seas.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the glazed bed of a dry lake lay shimmering like the mare imbrium&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="maricopas"><b>Maricopas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> The Pee-Posh people (also called Maricopa), a Native American nation of the lower Gila and Salt River valleys of present-day Arizona, traditional enemies of the Quechan (Yuma) and allies of the Pima.</p><p class="q">&#8220;where Maricopas had crucified an Apache&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="marl"><b>marl</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="marls"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A sedimentary rock composed of a mixture of clay and calcium carbonate (limestone); it weathers to a pale, crumbly surface and comes in various earth tones.</p><p class="q">&#8220;through marl and terracotta and rifts of copper shale&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mastiff"><b>mastiff</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mastiffs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A breed of large, heavy-boned dog, known for its massive head and powerful build; one of the largest dog breeds.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the doctor&#8217;s mastiff also was committed to the flames&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="matracas"><b>matracas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Plural of <em>matraca</em>: a wooden or metal clapper rattle producing a loud clacking sound when spun; traditionally used in Catholic Holy Week processions as a substitute for church bells.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a clanging of tambourines and matracas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="matrix"><b>matrix</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="matrixes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Here, the mixed paste of saltpetre, charcoal, sulphur, and urine worked up into a raw gunpowder compound; more broadly, any substance in which other materials are embedded or processed.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The matrix&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mayhaps"><b>mayhaps</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mayhap"/><idx:iform value="mayhapsed"/><idx:iform value="mayhapsing"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adverb)</i> Archaic and dialectal form of &#8220;perhaps&#8221; or &#8220;maybe,&#8221; common in Irish and regional British English speech.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Mayhaps he aint to your liking&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mcculloch"><b>McCulloch&#8217;s Rangers</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="rangers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> The company of Texas Rangers raised by Benjamin McCulloch (1811&#8211;1862) during the Mexican-American War, serving as scouts and light cavalry under General Zachary Taylor in northern Mexico 1846&#8211;1848.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a man named Tate from Kentucky who had fought with McCulloch&#8217;s Rangers&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mckenzie"><b>McKenzie crossing</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="crossing"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A ford on the Clear Fork of the Brazos River near Fort Griffin, Texas, named for Col. Ranald S. Mackenzie, whose 4th Cavalry supply wagons crossed there during the Red River War of 1874; a well-traveled route for hunters and settlers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the McKenzie crossing of the Clear Fork of the Brazos River&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mealbin"><b>mealbin</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mealbins"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A storage bin or chest for meal (ground grain, especially cornmeal); a basic household storage piece in frontier and rural Mexican homes.</p><p class="q">&#8220;no furniture save pallets for sleeping, perhaps a wooden mealbin&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="meatcamp"><b>meatcamp</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="meatcamps"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A camp established for butchering and drying meat; a temporary hunting or slaughtering encampment.</p><p class="q">&#8220;She was in a meatcamp about eight mile up the river&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A temporary camp where hunters dress and process a kill; a butchering site in the field.</p><p class="q">&#8220;moved off over the slopes a good mile from their meatcamp&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="medallions"><b>medallions of some order of the hunt</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hunt"/><idx:iform value="order"/><idx:iform value="some"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> A figurative comparison: the flattened lead bullets lying among the carcass ribs look like the decorative medals awarded to members of a chivalric order, here ironically &#8220;the hunt.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;flat discs of darkened lead like old medallions of some order of the hunt&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="medanos"><b>Medanos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Sand dunes; m&#233;danos (singular: m&#233;dano) is the Spanish term for large desert dune fields.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The Medanos&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="medicine"><b>medicine show</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="show"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A traveling show, common in 19th-century America, that sold patent medicines and cure-alls alongside entertainment acts.</p><p class="q">&#8220;fleeing from a medicine show and the outrage of the citizens&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="medusa"><b>medusa</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="medusas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> a jellyfish; the soft, bell-shaped, trailing-tentacled swimming form (apt for the collapsing tent).</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;like a huge and wounded medusa it slowly settled to the ground&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="indios"><b>Mejor los indios</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mejor"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Better the Indians&#8221; or &#8220;The Indians are preferable&#8221;; a contemptuous graffito expressing that the Apache raiders are preferable to the Americans now occupying the city.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Charcoal scrawls appeared on the limewashed walls. Mejor los indios.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mennonite"><b>Mennonite</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mennonites"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> A member of a Protestant Christian denomination descended from the 16th-century Radical Reformation, following the teachings of Menno Simons; Mennonites are known for pacifism, plain dress, and separation from worldly violence.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A Mennonite &#8212; Companion killed&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>
