<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf">
<head><meta charset="utf-8"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="dict.css"/></head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="fulgurite"><b>fulgurite</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fulgurites"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A glassy tube or crust formed when lightning strikes and fuses sandy soil or rock into silica glass; the branching shapes follow the path the lightning took through the ground.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the strange coral shapes of fulgurite in their scorched furrows&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="furlong"><b>furlong</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="furlongs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A unit of distance equal to one-eighth of a mile (220 yards, about 201 metres), originally the length of a furrow ploughed by a team of oxen in one pass across an open field.</p><p class="q">&#8220;not more than a furlong on the slope&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="fusil"><b>fusil</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fusils"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A light smoothbore flintlock musket or carbine, used by cavalry and light infantry; lighter than a standard infantry musket.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a gantlet of ragged fusil fire&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="fusils"><b>fusils</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fusil"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Light flintlock muskets, smaller and lighter than standard military muskets, issued to fusilier infantry and light troops; from Old French <em>foisil</em>, &#8220;piece of flint&#8221; &#8212; the word that also gives us &#8220;fusilier.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;the guards with their shouldered fusils&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Light flintlock muskets (from French <em>fusil</em>); smooth-bore long guns lighter than a standard military musket, commonly traded to or acquired by frontier peoples.</p><p class="q">&#8220;some carried old fusils with tasseled stoppers in their bores&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> Light flintlock muskets; originally a French infantry firearm lighter than the standard musket, by 1849 an archaic term for any old, lightweight musket.</p><p class="q">&#8220;armed with derelict weapons, old fusils and Tower muskets&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gaitered"><b>gaitered shirts</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="shirts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Shirts worn with sleeve garters (elastic or metal bands around the upper sleeve) to hold the cuffs back and keep sleeves out of the way while working; standard attire for bartenders and clerks in the 1870s.</p><p class="q">&#8220;several men in gaitered shirts were drawing beer&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="galena"><b>galena</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="galenas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Lead sulfide (PbS), the principal ore of lead; here referring to raw lead hauled in bulk to the hunting grounds so hunters could cast their own projectiles in the field.</p><p class="q">&#8220;not haulin a thing but lead. Just pure galena.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="galled"><b>galled</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="galledly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> <b>1.</b> Rubbed raw or chafed by friction; describing an animal&#8217;s skin worn into sores by a saddle or harness.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the mule&#8217;s back galled and balding&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> <b>2.</b> Having raw, open sores on the skin caused by chafing from harness or yoke; a common affliction of overworked draft animals.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the oxen galled and mad-looking&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gallery"><b>gallery</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="galleries"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> a raised or rear section where onlookers stand or sit.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;called an ugly thug from the gallery to the rear.&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun, of a building)</i> <b>2.</b> a long roofed porch or veranda running along the outside of a building.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The kid and his friend reached the hotel gallery&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="galveston"><b>Galveston</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="galvestons"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> a port city built on a low barrier island on the Texas coast of the Gulf of Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;To Galveston&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="molds"><b>gang-molds</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gang"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Multi-cavity bullet-casting molds that produce several lead balls or conical projectiles simultaneously by running molten lead through linked cavities; standard equipment for field resupply of black-powder firearms.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Speyer was breaking out the gang-molds and flasks and tools&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gantlet"><b>gantlet</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gantlets"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A military punishment in which a person runs between two rows of soldiers who strike at him; here used figuratively for running through a gauntlet of hostile fire. (Variant spelling of <em>gauntlet</em> in this specific sense.)</p><p class="q">&#8220;they ran a gantlet of ragged fusil fire and rocks and bottles&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="garrote"><b>garrote</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="garroted"/><idx:iform value="garrotes"/><idx:iform value="garroting"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> To strangle with a cord, wire, or rope; originally a Spanish method of judicial execution by strangling. Here used as a weapon of combat.</p><p class="q">&#8220;ropes with which to garrote the enemy&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gastine"><b>gastine</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gastines"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A rare archaic or literary term (from Old French) for a desolate wasteland or barren wilderness.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a pale gastine sparsely grown with saltbush&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="patterson"><b>General Patterson</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="general"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> Major General Robert Patterson (1792&#8211;1881), U.S. Army officer who served in the Mexican-American War as second in command to Winfield Scott, leading volunteer divisions.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a company from Kentucky under General Patterson arrived&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="general"><b>General Worth</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="worth"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> Major General William Jenkins Worth (1794&#8211;1849), U.S. Army; he fought under Taylor and Scott in the Mexican-American War and commanded the Department of Texas at the time of the novel&#8217;s events, dying of cholera in San Antonio in May 1849.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The United States Army. General Worth.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="zuloaga"><b>General Zuloaga</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="general"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> F&#233;lix Mar&#237;a Zuloaga (1813&#8211;1898), Mexican general and Conservative politician who commanded forces in Chihuahua following the Mexican-American War; he later served as conservative interim president of Mexico (1858&#8211;1859).</p><p class="q">&#8220;the hacienda of General Zuloaga&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gentian"><b>gentian</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gentians"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A plant of the genus <em>Gentiana</em>, known for its intense deep blue or purple tubular flowers; found in mountain and alpine habitats throughout the Americas.</p><p class="q">&#8220;deep purple gentian and wild vines of blue morninglory&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="geological"><b>geological cataclysm</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cataclysm"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> A violent upheaval of the earth&#8217;s crust &#8212; earthquake, volcanic eruption, or continental shift &#8212; invoked here by the judge as a pseudo-scientific cause for the geographical separation and divergence of human races.</p><p class="q">&#8220;through the agency of geological cataclysm&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="silver"><b>german silver</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="german"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Nickel silver; a silver-white alloy of copper, nickel, and zinc containing no actual silver, widely used in the 19th century for decorative inlay on firearms and instruments.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a handsome rifle bound with german silver&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A silvery alloy of copper, nickel, and zinc&#8212;containing no actual silver&#8212;used for decorative mounts and inlay work on firearms and other metalwork.</p><p class="q">&#8220;all mounted in german silver&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="shed"><b>get shed of</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase, dialectal)</i> to get rid of.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;you caint get shed of him.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gibbet"><b>gibbet</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gibbets"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A gallows or upright post with a projecting arm from which a body or effigy is hanged for public display.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the bench of loam where the gibbet stood&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gibbous"><b>gibbous</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gibbou"/><idx:iform value="gibbously"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Of the moon: more than half but not fully illuminated; the phase between half and full moon.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Under a gibbous moon&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gilenos"><b>Gilenos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The Gile&#241;os, a band of the Gila Apache (Southern Athabaskan-speaking people) whose homeland centered on the Gila River region of present-day southwestern New Mexico and southeastern Arizona.</p><p class="q">&#8220;all trace of the Gilenos faded&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>2.</b> The Gile&#241;os, a band of Apache people indigenous to the Gila River region of southwestern New Mexico and southeastern Arizona; their name derives from the Gila River.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the Gilenos had decamped in small bands&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>3.</b> Mexican name for the Gila Apache (Apaches de Xila), a Southern Athabaskan people whose homelands centred on the Gila River region of southwestern New Mexico and adjoining Chihuahua. In 1849 they were actively raiding in Chihuahua state, where the Mexican government paid scalp bounties for Apache dead.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Slaughter of the Gilenos&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>4.</b> The Gile&#241;os (also called Gila Apache), a Southern Athabaskan-speaking Apache group indigenous to the Gila River region of southwestern New Mexico and southeastern Arizona; one of the main Apache bands that raided deep into Chihuahua.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they looked off toward the north where the Gilenos wintered&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gill"><b>gill</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gills"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A unit of liquid measure equal to a quarter of a pint (about 4 U.S. fluid ounces or 118 ml); here the barman pours roughly half that amount of whiskey.</p><p class="q">&#8220;poured perhaps half a gill&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gills"><b>gills</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gill"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Unit of liquid measure equal to a quarter of a pint (about four fluid ounces); stamped on tin drinking cups to mark standard servings.</p><p class="q">&#8220;small tin cups whereon the gills were stamped&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="girthrings"><b>girthrings</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="girthring"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Metal rings on a saddle through which the girth (the strap that holds the saddle on the horse) is threaded and fastened; part of the saddle&#8217;s rigging.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the smoking gunlocks and sabreblades and girthrings were dragged from the ashes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="girthstraps"><b>girthstraps</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="girthstrap"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The leather straps on a saddle that secure the girth (belly band) around the horse&#8217;s barrel, holding the saddle in place.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he tightened the girthstraps and then mounted up&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> The straps on a saddle that fasten and adjust the girth (the band that goes under the horse&#8217;s belly to hold the saddle in place).</p><p class="q">&#8220;commenced to unbuckle the girthstraps&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="glaces"><b>glaces</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(French)</i> From French glacer, to glaze or ice; glazed or candied confections, either foods coated with a shiny glaze of sugar or aspic, or candied fruits finished with a hard sugar coating.</p><p class="q">&#8220;casseroles of savories and trifles and glaces&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="glanton"><b>Glanton</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="glantons"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> <b>1.</b> John Joel Glanton (1819&#8211;1850), a Texas Ranger and soldier who after the Mexican&#8211;American War led a notorious gang of scalp hunters under contract with the governor of Chihuahua, paid bounties for Apache scalps.</p><p class="q">&#8220;His name is Glanton&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> <b>2.</b> John Joel Glanton (c.&#160;1819&#8211;1850), a Texas Ranger and Mexican&#8211;American War veteran who led a gang of scalp hunters hired by the Chihuahua government to kill Apache raiders for bounty payments; historically notorious for indiscriminate killing.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Glanton turned in the saddle&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="glass"><b>glass</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="glas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A telescope or spyglass &#8212; a monocular optical instrument for observing distant objects.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the corporal would lie at his elbow with a glass&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gnadenhutten"><b>Gnadenhutten</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gnadenhuttens"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A village in Ohio where, in 1782, American militia massacred nearly a hundred Christian Delaware (Lenape) Indians; a pivotal trauma in Delaware history.</p><p class="q">&#8220;from the ashes at Gnadenhutten&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gobbet"><b>gobbet</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gobbets"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A chunk or lump of raw flesh or food; an archaic word for a mouthful or morsel of something bloody or meaty.</p><p class="q">&#8220;some foul gobbet dangling from its jaws&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="eagles"><b>gold eagles</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gold"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> U.S. gold coins with a face value of ten dollars, authorized by the Coinage Act of 1792; &#8220;half eagles&#8221; were five-dollar gold pieces.</p><p class="q">&#8220;French coins of ten franc value and gold eagles and half eagles&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gomez"><b>Gomez</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gomezes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> <b>1.</b> Juan G&#243;mez, a historical Mescalero Apache chief known as a feared raider in Chihuahua, on whose head the Mexican government placed a bounty of one thousand pesos.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a thousand for Gomez&#8217;s head&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> <b>2.</b> A Mescalero Apache war chief who led devastating raids into Chihuahua from the 1840s onward; Governor Tr&#237;as placed a bounty on his head and Gomez reputedly matched it, making him one of the most feared Apache leaders in the region during this period.</p><p class="q">&#8220;laid under annual contribution by Gomez and his band&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gondwanaland"><b>Gondwanaland</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gondwanalands"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> The ancient southern supercontinent that incorporated what are now South America, Africa, India, Australia, and Antarctica; it began breaking apart roughly 180 million years ago, long before any human life.</p><p class="q">&#8220;shambling the brutal wastes of Gondwanaland in a time before nomenclature was&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gorgons"><b>gorgons</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gorgon"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(allusion)</i> In Greek mythology, three monstrous female creatures &#8212; most famously Medusa &#8212; with serpents for hair whose gaze turned onlookers to stone; here used as a simile for the riders&#8217; terrible, primal aspect.</p><p class="q">&#8220;mute as gorgons shambling the brutal wastes of Gondwanaland&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gourd"><b>gourd</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gourds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The dried, hollowed shell of a gourd plant used as a ladle or drinking vessel.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the kid bent and took up the gourd floating there and dipped and drank&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="california"><b>Governor Burnett of California</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="burnett"/><idx:iform value="governor"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> Peter Hardeman Burnett (1807&#8211;1895), California&#8217;s first elected civilian governor, serving December 1849 &#8211; January 1851; he took office even before California was formally admitted to the Union in September 1850.</p><p class="q">&#8220;We have the tacit support of Governor Burnett of California&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="grama"><b>grama</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gramas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Native grasses of the genus *Bouteloua* (blue grama, black grama, sideoats grama), the dominant low-growing range grasses of the desert grasslands of the American Southwest and northern Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;sporadic ocotillo and stands of grama&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="grapeshot"><b>grapeshot</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="grapeshots"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Artillery ammunition consisting of a canvas bag or iron frame holding a cluster of iron or lead balls that scatter on firing like a giant shotgun blast. Used against massed troops at close range. Here the comparison is to large, heavy raindrops.</p><p class="q">&#8220;drops of rain the size of grapeshot&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gravel"><b>gravel</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gravels"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In dialectal or colloquial frontier usage, grit or courage; nerve.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They had gravel enough&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gravers"><b>gravers and burins</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="burins"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Small hand-held hardened steel cutting tools used by engravers to incise designs into metal or stone; &#8220;graver&#8221; is the English term and &#8220;burin&#8221; the French-derived synonym for the same instrument. Essential to cutting coin dies.</p><p class="q">&#8220;this false moneyer with his gravers and burins who seeks favor with the judge&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="greasewood"><b>greasewood</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="greasewoods"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A thorny desert shrub common in arid lowlands of the Southwest and northern Mexico; the name applies chiefly to *Sarcobatus vermiculatus*, with gray-green leaves and a resinous smell, though it is sometimes used loosely for creosote bush (*Larrea tridentata*) and related scrub.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the thicket of greasewood behind them&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="great"><b>Great Bear</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bear"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The constellation Ursa Major; its seven brightest stars form the asterism known as the Big Dipper or Plough, long used in the northern hemisphere to locate true north.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the Great Bear walking the mountains to the north&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Ursa Major, the large circumpolar constellation visible throughout the year in the Northern Hemisphere; its seven brightest stars form the Big Dipper, and the constellation rotates counterclockwise around Polaris (the North Star).</p><p class="q">&#8220;the Great Bear turned and the Pleiades winked&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="greenriver"><b>greenriver knife</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="knife"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A sturdy working knife made by the J. Russell &amp; Co. Green River Works in Massachusetts from the 1830s onward; stamped &#8220;Green River&#8221; on the blade, it was ubiquitous on the 19th-century American frontier.</p><p class="q">&#8220;an old greenriver knife with a handle made of string&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="griffin"><b>Griffin</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="griffins"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> Colloquial shortening of Fort Griffin, Texas (see argument entry).</p><p class="q">&#8220;we pulled out from Griffin for a last hunt&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="grogshop"><b>grogshop</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="grogshops"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A low drinking establishment; a shabby tavern or saloon where cheap spirits (grog) are sold. An archaic compound common in 19th-century American usage.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the tawdry grogshop&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="groundsel"><b>groundsel</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="groundsels"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A common flowering plant (<em>Senecio</em> spp.) in the daisy family, typically producing small yellow flowers; found throughout the Americas in meadows and disturbed ground.</p><p class="q">&#8220;acres of golden groundsel and zinnia&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="groundsloth"><b>groundsloth</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="groundsloths"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Any of several genera of large, extinct ground-dwelling sloths (e.g., Megatherium, Glossotherium) that lived in the Americas until roughly 10,000 years ago; here used as a simile for the hermit&#8217;s earth-embedded dwelling.</p><p class="q">&#8220;nested away in the sod like a groundsloth&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Any of numerous extinct species of large, slow-moving mammals (order Xenarthra) that lived in the Americas from the Oligocene until roughly 10,000 years ago; the largest species (<em>Megatherium</em>) reached the size of an elephant. They walked on the outer edges of their clawed feet and moved in a ponderous, shuffling gait.</p><p class="q">&#8220;shambling past the fires like a balden groundsloth&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="grouted"><b>grouted</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="grout"/><idx:iform value="groute"/><idx:iform value="grouteded"/><idx:iform value="grouteding"/><idx:iform value="grouteds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Filled the joints or cracks between stones; <em>grout</em> is the material used to seal gaps in masonry or between flagstones, here used figuratively for blood filling the crevices of the floor.</p><p class="q">&#8220;blood grouted the flagstones&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="guano"><b>guano</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="guanos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The accumulated dung of bats (or seabirds); here the deep deposits left by bats roosting in the abandoned church.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The floor of the church was deep in dried guano&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="guaymas"><b>Guaymas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A port city on the Gulf of California coast of Sonora, Mexico; its deep natural harbor made it strategically desirable to Americans seeking a Pacific port not dependent on overland California routes.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Guaymas a U S port&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="guidon"><b>guidon</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="guidons"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Here, an attendant or server who walks ahead of the priest carrying the viaticum, ringing a bell to clear the way and alert bystanders to show reverence.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The guidon passed ringing the bell and then the coach.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="guisado"><b>guisado</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="guisados"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Literally &#8220;stewed&#8221;; a slow-cooked meat stew, typically beef or goat simmered in a savory broth or sauce; a staple of Mexican and Tex-Mex cooking.</p><p class="q">&#8220;bowls of guisado made from goat&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gusseted"><b>gusseted</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gussetedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Having gussets &#8212; triangular or diamond-shaped inserts of cloth sewn into a garment at the underarm, crotch, or seams to give extra room and strength; here describing clothing taken from dead men and altered to fit.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the judge clad in the gusseted clothing of his recent associates&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="guttapercha"><b>guttapercha</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="guttaperchas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A rigid natural latex from Southeast Asian <em>Palaquium</em> trees; in the 19th century molded into containers, insulation, and other durable objects.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the mercury within the guttapercha flasks pulsing heavily&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="guyropes"><b>guyropes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="guyrope"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> ropes that brace and steady a tent or other standing structure.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;tattered canvas walls and ratty guyropes&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gypsum"><b>gypsum</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gypsums"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A soft white mineral (calcium sulfate dihydrate) that forms pale, almost luminescent dunes and flats in desert regions; notably found in the White Sands of New Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a lone albino ridge, sand or gypsum, like the back of some pale seabeast&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gypsy"><b>gypsy card</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="card"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A tarot or fortune-telling card associated with Romani divination practices; the four of cups is a specific tarot card traditionally associated with apathy or discontent.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a gypsy card that was the four of cups&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gomez"><b>G&#243;mez</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gomezes"/><idx:iform value="gómez"/><idx:iform value="gómezes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> A real Apache war chief (Tsebekinéndé band), active in the Chihuahua borderlands in the 1840s&#8211;60s; called &#8220;the terror of Chihuahua,&#8221; he raided settlements on both sides of the Rio Grande and was so feared that the governor of Chihuahua offered 1,000 pesos for his scalp.</p><p class="q">&#8220;You kill Gomez they pay you much monies.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="haberdashery"><b>haberdashery</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="haberdasheries"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Men&#8217;s clothing and accessories such as shirts, hats, and neckwear; a haberdasher&#8217;s wares.</p><p class="q">&#8220;when they crossed the square attired in their new haberdashery&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hacienda"><b>hacienda</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="haciendas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> A large estate or plantation, typically with its own house, workers&#8217; quarters, and outbuildings; a Spanish colonial landholding.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They spent the night in the corral of a hacienda&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hack"><b>hack</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hacks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Short for hackney; an ordinary hired or worn-out horse, as opposed to a quality mount.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The hack that he straddled trembled and pushed ahead&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hackamore"><b>hackamore</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hackamores"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> a bitless bridle that controls a horse by pressure on the nose and jaw rather than the mouth; from Spanish <em>j&#225;quima</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;bridled it with the rawhide hackamore&#8230;&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A bitless bridle that controls a horse through pressure on the nose, chin groove, and poll rather than a bit in the mouth; from Spanish <em>j&#225;quima</em> (headstall).</p><p class="q">&#8220;He stood holding the hackamore and studying the country&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="halfcock"><b>halfcock</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="halfcocks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An intermediate position of a firearm&#8217;s hammer, between fully down and fully cocked, serving as a safety position that prevents accidental discharge while allowing the cylinder to rotate freely for inspection.</p><p class="q">&#8220;set the hammer at halfcock and spun the cylinder&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="halfhitched"><b>halfhitched</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="halfhitch"/><idx:iform value="halfhitche"/><idx:iform value="halfhitcheded"/><idx:iform value="halfhitcheding"/><idx:iform value="halfhitcheds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Secured with a half hitch, a simple knot made by passing the rope around an object and then through its own loop; used to hold something in place temporarily.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They&#8217;d halfhitched the rope about the tailpost of the bed&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="halms"><b>halms</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="halm"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Archaic and dialectal form of &#8220;haulms&#8221;: the stalks or stems of grasses or grain plants; from Old English <em>healm</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The boy pulled at the halms of grass&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="handpurchase"><b>handpurchase</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="handpurchases"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A grip or hold secured by the hands alone, without mechanical advantage; archaic term for a handhold on a steep surface.</p><p class="q">&#8220;scrabbling for a handpurchase in the dark&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hardbit"><b>hardbit</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hardbitly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Tough, weathered, worn hard by difficult circumstances; a variant of &#8220;hard-bitten,&#8221; meaning toughened by hardship and experience.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They were a hardbit denizenry&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hardpan"><b>hardpan</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hardpans"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A layer of hard, compact, and impervious ground&#8212;typically compacted soil or caliche&#8212;lying just below the surface in arid regions; also used to describe any bare, hard desert surface.</p><p class="q">&#8220;you couldnt hear them on the hardpan&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="harpie"><b>Harpie eagles</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="eagles"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> McCarthy&#8217;s term likely invokes the mythological Harpies &#8212; winged predatory creatures of Greek myth &#8212; rather than the literal harpy eagle (Harpia harpyja), a tropical forest raptor of Central and South America that does not occur in the Chihuahuan desert. The image evokes huge, shrieking birds of prey descending on carrion.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Harpie eagles flew up screaming from a dead mule&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="harrow"><b>harrow</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="harrows"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> a farm implement with spikes or discs dragged over plowed ground to break up the soil.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;pursuing mule and harrow down the rainblown bottomland&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hasping"><b>hasping</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hasp"/><idx:iform value="haspe"/><idx:iform value="haspinged"/><idx:iform value="haspinging"/><idx:iform value="haspings"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Catching or clipping shut, like a hasp (a hinged clasp or fastening). Here describes the horseshoes catching and flashing the moonlight as the hooves lift and fall.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the polished shoes of the horses kept hasping up&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="caballero"><b>Hay un caballero aqu&#237;</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="aqui"/><idx:iform value="aquí"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish, phrase)</i> &#8220;There is a gentleman here.&#8221; <em>Caballero</em> means a gentleman, and literally a horseman or rider (from <em>caballo</em>, horse).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Hay un caballero aqu&#237;.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="soldados"><b>Hay whiskey en Tucson &#8230; Sin duda &#8230; Y soldados tambien</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="duda"/><idx:iform value="tambien"/><idx:iform value="tucson"/><idx:iform value="whiskey"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;There is whiskey in Tucson &#8230; Without a doubt &#8230; And soldiers too.&#8221; <em>Hay whiskey en Tucson</em> = there is whiskey in Tucson; <em>sin duda</em> = without a doubt, certainly; <em>y soldados tambi&#233;n</em> = and soldiers also.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Hay whiskey en Tucson &#8230; Sin duda &#8230; Y soldados tambien.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hazed"><b>hazed</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="haz"/><idx:iform value="haze"/><idx:iform value="hazeded"/><idx:iform value="hazeding"/><idx:iform value="hazeds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> To drive or move livestock (or here, a spare horse) in a particular direction by riding alongside or behind them.</p><p class="q">&#8220;someone hazed forward the last spare horse&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="headstall"><b>headstall</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="headstalls"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The part of a halter or bridle that fits over and around a horse&#8217;s head, from which the reins or lead rope are attached; the structural frame of the bridle distinct from the bit and reins.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the kid had seized the raw leather headstall and hauled the animal to a standstill&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> The part of a bridle or halter that fits over a horse&#8217;s head &#8212; the straps that hold the bit in place; the frame of the bridle excluding the reins.</p><p class="q">&#8220;stepped forward and took Toadvine&#8217;s horse by the headstall&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> The part of a bridle or halter that fits over a horse&#8217;s head; the straps that go over the poll and around the cheeks, holding the bit in place.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Mangas let go the rough hide headstall of the horse&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hearsecart"><b>hearsecart</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hearsecarts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A small horse-drawn cart used to convey a coffin or corpse; a modest, working-class version of the formal hearse carriage.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the little hearsecart stood at the door with the horses patient and motionless&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="heartsink"><b>heartsink</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="heartsinks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A sinking or falling feeling in the heart; a sense of despair or dread; used here to describe the absence of visible fear or despondency in the old woman&#8217;s eyes.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Neither courage nor heartsink in those old eyes.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="heath"><b>heath</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="heaths"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Open, uncultivated land, often at high elevation, with low-growing shrubs and grasses; moorland.</p><p class="q">&#8220;like cattle grazing on some upland heath&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="heliotropic"><b>heliotropic</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="heliotropicly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Turning or moving toward the sun; used here figuratively to describe the westward drift of the goldseekers as an irresistible, sun-seeking impulse.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Itinerant degenerates bleeding westward like some heliotropic plague&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="drawers"><b>hewers of wood and drawers of water</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hewers"/><idx:iform value="water"/><idx:iform value="wood"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> people kept to the lowest, most menial labor; a Biblical expression (Joshua 9:21) for a servile underclass.</p><p class="q">&#8220;His folk are known for hewers of wood and drawers of water&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hiccius"><b>Hiccius Doccius</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="doccius"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> A 17th-century English corruption of the Latin phrase <em>hicce est doctus</em> (&#8220;here is the learned man&#8221;), used as a performer&#8217;s incantation during juggling or conjuring acts, analogous to &#8220;hocus pocus.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Hiccius Doccius&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hickory"><b>hickory helve</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="helve"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The handle of an axe made from hickory wood; &#8220;helve&#8221; is the handle of an axe or hatchet.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a common axe the hickory helve of which was carved with pagan motifs&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hierbas"><b>Hierbas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Herbs; plants; grasses. The old man identifies his cargo as medicinal or culinary herbs.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Hierbas, he said&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="highland"><b>highland park</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="park"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An elevated, open meadow or plateau area among mountains, often naturally clear of dense forest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a highland park forested with Joshua trees&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hobbled"><b>hobbled</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hobbl"/><idx:iform value="hobble"/><idx:iform value="hobbleded"/><idx:iform value="hobbleding"/><idx:iform value="hobbleds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Loosely tied a horse&#8217;s front legs together with a strap so it can graze but cannot gallop away; a method of securing horses in open country.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He led the horse under the shade of the rock wall and hobbled it&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hogan"><b>hogan</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hogans"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A traditional Navajo dwelling, typically a single-room structure of logs and earth with a doorway facing east; used loosely here for any small Native shelter.</p><p class="q">&#8220;It crouched against the rear wall of the hogan&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="holocaust"><b>holocaust</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="holocausts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In its older literary sense, a great conflagration or consuming blaze; from Greek holokauston (&#8220;burnt whole&#8221;), originally meaning a burnt offering.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The sun to the west lay in a holocaust&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="holothurians"><b>holothurians</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="holothurian"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Sea cucumbers; soft-bodied marine invertebrates of the class Holothuroidea that live on the ocean floor, with elongated, cylindrical bodies that can glow faintly in deep, phosphorescent water.</p><p class="q">&#8220;pulsed like burning holothurians in the phosphorous dark of the sea&#8217;s deeps&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="iron"><b>hoop-iron</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hoop"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Iron rolled into thin flat strips used to bind the staves of barrels together; frontier hardware repurposed for countless repairs. Here forming the iron tip of a Comanche arrow.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the bloody hoop-iron point&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Flat iron strips used as binding hoops around wooden barrels and as reinforcing bands on wagon wheels; after the wagons burned, only the charred iron remained as armature.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the blackened shapes of hoop-iron and tires&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hospice"><b>hospice</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hospices"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Here used in the archaic sense: hospitality, the act of welcoming a guest; a gesture of hosting. Not the modern medical sense.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He stepped back and held out one hand in a strange gesture of hospice&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Archaic: a place of shelter or lodging, especially one offering refuge to travelers; here the town lights appear as a welcoming haven on the dark plain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a false shore of hospice cradled on the low plain&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hove"><b>hove</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hoved"/><idx:iform value="hoves"/><idx:iform value="hoving"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Nautical past tense of <em>heave</em>: to rise gradually into view or move toward something &#8212; used especially of ships appearing over the horizon, extended to anything that looms or draws near.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they hove toward the rimrock again&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="howitzer"><b>howitzer</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="howitzers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A short-barreled cannon designed to fire shells at a high angle; lighter and more mobile than a field gun, it was commonly used in rough terrain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a bronze twelvepounder with a bore the size of a saucer&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="huaraches"><b>huaraches</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Traditional Mexican sandals woven from strips of leather, worn since pre-Columbian times; the name comes from the Pur&#233;pecha (Tarascan) word kwarachi, meaning &#8220;sandal.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;The huaraches he wore looked like dried and blackened fish&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hueco"><b>Hueco</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="huecos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> A Native American people of the Texas&#8211;New Mexico borderlands, associated with the Hueco Tanks area; an archaeological culture attested in the region before European contact.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he&#8217;d once drawn an old Hueco&#8217;s portrait&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tanks"><b>Hueco tanks</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hueco"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A rocky outcrop about thirty miles east of El Paso, Texas, whose name comes from the Spanish word for &#8220;hollows&#8221;; natural granite basins collect rainwater, making the site a rare reliable water source in the surrounding desert, and thousands of ancient pictographs cover the rocks.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The Hueco tanks&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="huesos"><b>Huesos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Bones&#8221;; here meaning boiled bones or a bone broth/stew &#8212; the simplest, cheapest food available. Singular <em>hueso</em>; <em>huesos</em> is plural.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Huesos, she said.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hull"><b>hull</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hulls"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Western and dialectal slang for a saddle; from the framework (the tree or hull) at the saddle&#8217;s core.</p><p class="q">&#8220;I got a old hull on the mule but they aint much left of it&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="husbandman"><b>husbandman</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="husbandmans"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun, archaic)</i> a farmer; one who works the land.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A lone dark husbandman pursuing mule and harrow&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="huzzahs"><b>huzzahs</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="huzzah"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Archaic exclamations of enthusiasm or approval, equivalent to &#8220;hurrahs&#8221;; a cheer used especially in military and ceremonial contexts.</p><p class="q">&#8220;old men waving their hats and crying out huzzahs&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="fatuus"><b>ignis fatuus</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ignis"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Latin)</i> Literally &#8220;foolish fire&#8221;; a will-o&#8217;-the-wisp, a flickering light seen over marshy ground at night, believed caused by marsh gas; figuratively, any deceptive or misleading goal or guide.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Like some ignis fatuus belated upon the road behind them&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="igualmente"><b>Igualmente</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="igualmentes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Likewise&#8221; or &#8220;The same to you&#8221;; a standard reply to <em>mucho gusto</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Igualmente, said the sergeant.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ilex"><b>ilex</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ilexes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The holm oak (<em>Quercus ilex</em>), a Mediterranean evergreen oak with tough, glossy leaves; used here to describe scrubby oak growth on rocky slopes.</p><p class="q">&#8220;dwarf oak and ilex&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="imbreachment"><b>imbreachment</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="imbreachments"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A word not found in standard dictionaries; McCarthy&#8217;s coinage (or extreme archaism) suggesting an overflowing, breaking-out, or eruption &#8212; here describing mercury bursting from the flasks and flooding the rock channels.</p><p class="q">&#8220;like the imbreachment of some ultimate alchemic work&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="imponderable"><b>imponderable</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="imponderablely"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Incapable of being weighed or measured; here conveying the sense of something impossibly oppressive, beyond reckoning.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a cinderland of caked slurry and volcanic ash imponderable as the burnedout floor of hell&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="importunate"><b>importunate</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="importunately"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> <b>1.</b> Persistently demanding or pleading; troublesomely urgent in asking for something.</p><p class="q">&#8220;whole deputations of the blind and the maimed and the importunate&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> <b>2.</b> Persistently demanding or troublesome; pressing urgently and annoyingly for something.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Glanton pushed on through that importunate horde&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="incandescing"><b>incandescing</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="incandesc"/><idx:iform value="incandesce"/><idx:iform value="incandescinged"/><idx:iform value="incandescinging"/><idx:iform value="incandescings"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Glowing white or bright with intense heat; emitting visible light as a result of being heated to a very high temperature.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the carbonized skulls of their enemies incandescing before them bright as blood among the coals&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="incoordinate"><b>incoordinate</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="incoordinately"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Without order or coordination; here describing a vast, featureless desert wasteland with no clear landmarks or bearings.</p><p class="q">&#8220;reckoning out the camp in that incoordinate waste&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="indigents"><b>indigents</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="indigent"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Destitute people; those lacking the basic necessities of life; the impoverished vagrant population of the town.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They&#8217;d recruited two men from among the town&#8217;s indigents&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="infatuate"><b>infatuate</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="infatuately"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Blindly or recklessly driven, as if by an infatuation or madness; here the riders ride west in a state of heedless, irrational compulsion.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they rode infatuate and half fond toward the red demise of that day&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="inimical"><b>inimical</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="inimically"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Hostile and harmful; tending to obstruct or destroy.</p><p class="q">&#8220;something inimical lived&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="interlocutrix"><b>interlocutrix</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="interlocutrixes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A female interlocutor or go-between; from Latin <em>interloqui</em>, to speak between. A woman who mediates speech or acts as intermediary in a dialogue.</p><p class="q">&#8220;that blind interlocutrix between Boaz and Jachin&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="investing"><b>investing</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="invest"/><idx:iform value="investe"/><idx:iform value="investinged"/><idx:iform value="investinging"/><idx:iform value="investings"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> In its military sense, surrounding or occupying (a town or position) so as to control it; here: taking over the town.</p><p class="q">&#8220;reported them investing the town of Coyame&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="isomers"><b>isomers</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="isomer"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In chemistry, compounds with the same molecular formula but different structural arrangements; here used as an image for frost-coated shrubs that are ghostly mirror versions of their own shapes.</p><p class="q">&#8220;shrubs were like polar isomers of their own shapes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jacal"><b>jacal</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jacals"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A vernacular dwelling of the Texas&#8211;Mexico borderlands: vertical poles or timbers planted in the ground and lashed together, with gaps filled by wattle and mud plaster. From Nahuatl <em>xacalli</em> (&#8220;hut&#8221;). The most common rural housing form in South Texas and northern Mexico in the 19th century.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a solitary jacal, crude hut of mud and wattles&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jacales"><b>jacales</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Simple huts or shacks; from Nahuatl xacalli, a dwelling of branches, straw, or adobe, common in rural Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;past the first of a row of jacales&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wolves"><b>jackal wolves</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jackal"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An older colloquial name for coyotes (<em>Canis latrans</em>), which were also called &#8220;prairie wolves,&#8221; &#8220;brush wolves,&#8221; and &#8220;American jackals&#8221; by 19th-century settlers because of their resemblance to both jackals and small wolves.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The little jackal wolves cried from across the river&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jackboots"><b>jackboots</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jackboot"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Tall, sturdy boots reaching to mid-calf or the knee, originally heavy military cavalry boots; here worn by the frontier dancers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the board floor slamming under the jackboots&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jackhares"><b>jackhares</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jackhare"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Jackrabbits &#8212; large North American hares (<em>Lepus</em> spp.) common in desert and plains regions. McCarthy uses an archaic compound form of the name.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Mad jackhares started and checked in the blue glare&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>
