<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf">
<head><meta charset="utf-8"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="dict.css"/></head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="toledo"><b>Toledo swords</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="swords"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> Blades forged in Toledo, Spain, a city famous for sword-making since Roman times; Toledo steel, produced by forge-welding high- and low-carbon iron, was prized for combining hardness with flexibility and was considered among the finest in the world.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a group of Toledo swords with ivory hilts and nicely chased blades&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tonkawas"><b>Tonkawas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> A Native American people originally of central Texas who by the 1870s had been removed to Indian Territory (Oklahoma); their presence outside the dancehall reflects the dispossessed remnants who drifted around frontier settlements.</p><p class="q">&#8220;groups of wretched Tonkawas stood in the mud&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tonsured"><b>tonsured</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tonsuredly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Having the top or crown of the head shaved in the manner of Christian monks, who shaved a circular patch as a sign of religious devotion. Here used for the scalped men whose skulls are bare to the bone.</p><p class="q">&#8220;lay like maimed and naked monks&#8221;&#8230;&#8220;tonsured to the bone&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tontos"><b>tontos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Literally &#8220;fools&#8221; or &#8220;idiots&#8221; (singular <em>tonto</em>); applied as an ethnic label by Spanish speakers to the Tonto Apache of central Arizona&#8217;s Tonto Basin. The name stuck as a pejorative ethnic designation for those Apache bands considered &#8220;wild&#8221; or beyond civilization.</p><p class="q">&#8220;reduced indians or tontos as their brothers outside the gates would name them&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="topers"><b>topers</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="toper"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Heavy, habitual drinkers; drunkards.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the shapes of insensate topers lay snoring about the floor&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tortoiseshell"><b>tortoiseshell combs</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="combs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Decorative hair combs made from (or imitating) the mottled, translucent shell of the hawksbill tortoise; a fashionable women&#8217;s hair ornament throughout the 19th century.</p><p class="q">&#8220;tortoiseshell combs in their blueblack hair&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="touch"><b>touch-hole</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hole"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The small vent drilled through the breech of a cannon or musket through which a spark or flame reaches the powder charge to fire the weapon.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Brown crammed his lighted cigar into the touch-hole&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tow"><b>tow</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tows"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Short, coarse fiber from flax or hemp; used here as a torch material, the tip of the cane being wound with tow soaked or lit to carry fire.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a long cane from the fire tipped with lighted tow&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="muskets"><b>Tower muskets</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tower"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(named object)</i> British military flintlock muskets bearing the &#8220;Tower&#8221; mark of the Tower of London Armoury, where government-issued arms were assembled and inspected; the Brown Bess pattern musket most commonly associated with this mark. By 1849 they were obsolete holdovers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;old fusils and Tower muskets&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="trailspades"><b>trailspades</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="trailspade"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The spade-shaped rear end of a cannon&#8217;s trail (the rearward arm of a gun carriage) that digs into the ground to absorb recoil when the gun fires.</p><p class="q">&#8220;chained to the trailspades of their pieces&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="trammeled"><b>trammeled</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="trammeledly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Hampered, constrained, bound; from &#8220;trammel,&#8221; a net or impediment.</p><p class="q">&#8220;rode forth south &#8230; trammeled to chords of rawest destiny&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="transylvania"><b>Transylvania College</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="college"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> Transylvania University, founded 1780 in Lexington, Kentucky; the oldest college west of the Allegheny Mountains, known for its law and medical schools and for alumni including Jefferson Davis and Stephen Austin.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he &#8230; had attended Transylvania College&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="trapdykes"><b>trapdykes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="trapdyke"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Tabular intrusions of trap rock (basalt or diabase) that cut across older rock strata at a steep angle and run along the landscape as wall-like ridges after the softer surrounding rock erodes.</p><p class="q">&#8220;trapdykes of brown rock running down the narrow chines of the ridges&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="traprock"><b>traprock</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="traprocks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An informal term for dark-colored fine-grained igneous rocks &#8212; chiefly basalt, diabase, or gabbro. From Swedish <em>trappa</em> (&#8220;stair&#8221;), for the step-like landscapes these rocks often form.</p><p class="q">&#8220;shelves of traprock reared in faults and anticlines&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="trebillones"><b>trebillones</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Large dust spouts or whirlwinds; a regional term used in northern Mexico and New Mexico for the towering spinning columns of dust that rise from desert plains (related to Spanish <em>torbellino</em>, whirlwind).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Trebillones&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="trias"><b>Trias</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> <b>1.</b> &#193;ngel Tr&#237;as &#193;lvarez (1809&#8211;1867), Mexican military officer and governor of Chihuahua on multiple occasions; he authorized and funded contracts with scalp hunters to suppress Apache raiding.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He&#8217;s got a contract with Trias.&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> <b>2.</b> &#193;ngel Tr&#237;as &#193;lvarez (1809&#8211;1867), Mexican politician and soldier who served multiple terms as governor of the state of Chihuahua; he fought against U.S. forces in the Mexican&#8211;American War and was closely allied with President Benito Ju&#225;rez.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Trias &#8212; The ball&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tribunal"><b>tribunal</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tribunals"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An assembly or group acting in judgment; here used for the attending group of Yuma warriors who witness and participate in the execution of Glanton.</p><p class="q">&#8220;one of the attending tribunal handed him&#8230; a common axe&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="truck"><b>truck</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="trucked"/><idx:iform value="trucking"/><idx:iform value="trucks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> In artillery, the wheeled wooden carriage on which the cannon rests and is transported; not a motor vehicle.</p><p class="q">&#8220;this piece stood idle and unloaded in its wooden truck&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> <b>2.</b> Archaic/dialectal: to have dealings with; to trade or barter; here &#8220;truck with&#8221; means to deal with or concern oneself with.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the doings of the world were too slanderous for him to truck with&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="trundlecarts"><b>trundlecarts</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="trundlecart"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Small low carts on wheels, pushed or pulled by hand; a trundle is a small wheel or roller, so a trundlecart is a hand-wheeled vendor&#8217;s cart.</p><p class="q">&#8220;boys were selling grapes and figs from little trundlecarts&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="trundled"><b>trundled</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="trundl"/><idx:iform value="trundle"/><idx:iform value="trundleded"/><idx:iform value="trundleding"/><idx:iform value="trundleds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Rolled or wheeled something heavy along the ground.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they trundled the piece to a place of advantage&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tubac"><b>Tubac</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tubacs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A Spanish colonial presidio (military fort) town on the Santa Cruz River, about 45 miles south of Tucson, established in 1752 as the first European settlement in what is now Arizona. By 1849 it had been largely abandoned due to Apache raids.</p><p class="q">&#8220;in the evening they passed through Tubac, abandoned&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tug"><b>tug</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tugs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Dialectal term for dried or jerked meat; strips of meat dried hard for preservation.</p><p class="q">&#8220;you want to trade some of that tug for it&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A leather strap or loop that is part of a horse harness, used to attach the traces or shafts; here, strips of harness leather salvaged from desert wreckage.</p><p class="q">&#8220;bound with strips of tug&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tumacacori"><b>Tumacacori</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tumacacoris"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> Mission San Jos&#233; de Tumac&#225;cori, founded by Jesuit Father Eusebio Kino in 1691 on the Santa Cruz River, about 45 miles south of Tucson. The present ruined church was built between 1799 and 1822 and was abandoned in 1848 under Apache pressure; now a National Historical Park.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Tumacacori &#8212; The mission&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tumbril"><b>tumbril</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tumbrils"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A two-wheeled open cart, originally used for hauling dung or farm produce; later notorious as the vehicle that carried condemned prisoners to the guillotine during the French Revolution.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The tumbril burned&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tyrolean"><b>tyrolean costume</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="costume"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The traditional folk dress of Tyrol (an Alpine region of Austria and northern Italy), typically featuring lederhosen or dirndl, a green felt hat with a feather or brush, and embroidered trim; here marking the showman as a European entertainer.</p><p class="q">&#8220;an old man in a tyrolean costume&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="accidente"><b>Un accidente, nada mas</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="nada"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;An accident, nothing more.&#8221; <em>Un</em> = an/one; <em>accidente</em> = accident; <em>nada m&#225;s</em> = nothing more.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Un accidente, nada mas.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hacendado"><b>Un hacendado</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;A hacienda owner&#8221;; a wealthy landowner or rancher in Spanish-colonial Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Un hacendado&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="piedra"><b>Un hueso de piedra</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hueso"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;A bone of stone&#8221;&#8212;a petrified bone. <em>Un</em> = a; <em>hueso</em> = bone; <em>de piedra</em> = of stone.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Un hueso de piedra&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="maleficio"><b>Un maleficio &#8230; Que viento tan maleante</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="maleante"/><idx:iform value="viento"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;A curse &#8230; What an evil wind.&#8221; <em>Maleficio</em> = a curse or hex; <em>maleante</em> = wicked, criminal, evil.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Un maleficio &#8230; Que viento tan maleante&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="caridad"><b>Una corta caridad &#8230; Por Dios</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="corta"/><idx:iform value="dios"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;A small charity &#8230; For God&#8217;s sake.&#8221; A beggar&#8217;s plea for alms.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Una corta caridad &#8230; Por Dios.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="uncinched"><b>uncinched</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="uncinch"/><idx:iform value="uncinche"/><idx:iform value="uncincheded"/><idx:iform value="uncincheding"/><idx:iform value="uncincheds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Unfastened or loosened the cinch &#8212; the broad strap or girth that holds a saddle onto a horse or mule.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He uncinched and threw down the saddle&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="uncottered"><b>uncottered</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="uncotter"/><idx:iform value="uncottere"/><idx:iform value="uncottereded"/><idx:iform value="uncottereding"/><idx:iform value="uncottereds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb, past participle)</i> McCarthy&#8217;s coinage from &#8220;cotter,&#8221; a split pin or wedge that locks moving parts in place; &#8220;uncottered&#8221; means the locking pin has come loose, i.e., unhinged or unmoored.</p><p class="q">&#8220;his mind had come uncottered by the acts of blood&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="underwrite"><b>underwrite</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="underwrited"/><idx:iform value="underwrites"/><idx:iform value="underwriting"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> To back financially; to accept liability for a wager or bet; originally an insurance term meaning to sign under a policy agreeing to cover the risk.</p><p class="q">&#8220;not even Glanton had been willing to underwrite this third trial&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="unentailed"><b>unentailed</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="unentailedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Without legal entailment; free of claims or obligations attached to it. The judge asks whether a man&#8217;s ruin can truly have no prior cause, no &#8220;lien&#8221; or creditor behind it.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the wreckage of his existence is unentailed&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="unreckonable"><b>unreckonable</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="unreckonablely"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Impossible to calculate or comprehend; beyond reckoning or measure.</p><p class="q">&#8220;that great slag wandered for what millennia from what unreckonable corner of the universe&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ures"><b>Ures</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A real town in Sonora, Mexico, which served as the state capital of Sonora for much of the 19th century (including 1847&#8211;1879).</p><p class="q">&#8220;they rode into the town of Ures, capital of the state of Sonora&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="urstone"><b>urstone</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="urstones"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A coinage using the German prefix <em>ur-</em> (original, primordial, earliest) with &#8220;stone&#8221;: the primal or foundational stone of existence, that which underlies all things from the beginning. Not a standard dictionary word; McCarthy&#8217;s own formation.</p><p class="q">&#8220;be his charter written in the urstone itself&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="vadose"><b>vadose water</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="water"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Water percolating through the unsaturated zone of soil and rock between the surface and the water table, where pores contain air as well as water; from Latin <em>vadosus</em>, &#8220;shallow.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;vadose water dripping down the slick black rock&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="valgame"><b>Valgame Dios</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dios"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Literally &#8220;May God protect me&#8221; or &#8220;God help me&#8221;; an exclamation of distress or desperate supplication, equivalent to &#8220;Good God!&#8221; in English.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Valgame Dios, he gasped.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="vamonos"><b>Vamonos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Let&#8217;s go&#8221; or &#8220;Let&#8217;s move out&#8221;; first-person plural imperative of <em>irse</em> (to go).</p><p class="q">&#8220;You want to ride with us you fall in in the back &#8230; Vamonos.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="vandiemenlander"><b>Vandiemenlander</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="vandiemenlanders"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A person from Van Diemen&#8217;s Land, the former British name for Tasmania, Australia, which served as a major penal colony until 1853; the word carries the strong connotation of transported convict or escaped felon.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The Vandiemenlander&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A person from Van Diemen&#8217;s Land, the British colonial name for Tasmania, Australia, until 1856. The colony was Britain&#8217;s primary penal transportation destination, so the name carried strong associations with convicts and criminal exile; the island was renamed Tasmania in 1856 specifically to shed that stigma.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the other two were the Vandiemenlander and a man from the east&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tranquilo"><b>Vaya tranquilo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="vaya"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Go easy&#8221; or &#8220;Take it easy&#8221;; an injunction to calm down. <em>Vaya</em> = imperative of <em>ir</em> (to go), here used as &#8220;easy now&#8221;; <em>tranquilo</em> = calm, easy.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Vaya tranquilo, he said. Un accidente, nada mas.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="venga"><b>Venga</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="vengas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> &#8220;Come&#8221; / &#8220;Come here&#8221; (the polite command form of <em>venir</em>, to come).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Venga. Hay un caballero aqu&#237;. Venga.&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> &#8220;Come&#8221; or &#8220;Come here&#8221;; a formal singular imperative used to invite or summon someone.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Venga, he called. Venga.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pronto"><b>Venga. Pronto.</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="venga"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Come. Quickly.&#8221; (<em>venga</em> = come, formal imperative; <em>pronto</em> = quickly, at once).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Mozos de cuadra, he called. Venga. Pronto.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ventilate"><b>ventilate</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ventilated"/><idx:iform value="ventilates"/><idx:iform value="ventilating"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Here in an archaic sense: to give public expression to; to hold forth or discourse at length on a subject. Not the modern sense of providing air.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the judge lost this opportunity to ventilate himself upon the ferric nature of heavenly bodies&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="vernier"><b>vernier sight</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sight"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A rear rifle sight with extremely fine elevation adjustment using a vernier scale (the same graduated-interpolation principle as a vernier caliper), allowing precise incremental settings for long-range target shooting.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The rifle carried a vernier sight on the tang&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="videttes"><b>videttes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="vidette"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Mounted sentinels posted ahead of or around a camp to watch for enemy movement; cavalry pickets set at the outermost edge of a formation&#8217;s security.</p><p class="q">&#8220;by what the videttes said&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Mounted cavalry sentinels posted ahead of a force to observe and give warning; an archaic spelling of <em>vedettes</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;posted videttes at the ford&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> Mounted cavalry sentinels posted at a distance from the main camp or outpost to watch for approaching enemies and give early warning; also spelled &#8220;vedettes.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;they posted videttes and turned in to sleep&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="vigas"><b>vigas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> The heavy wooden roof beams of traditional adobe architecture in the American Southwest, typically peeled logs laid across the tops of walls to support the roof.</p><p class="q">&#8220;smoke spread along the sagging vigas&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> Peeled log roof beams used in Pueblo and Spanish Colonial adobe construction; they span the width of the room and often project beyond the exterior wall.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a long room with a high ceiling and smokestained vigas&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>3.</b> Wooden roof beams; in Southwestern adobe and Pueblo architecture, the round log beams (<em>viga</em>, singular) that span the walls to carry the roof load. A defining feature of Spanish Colonial building in the region.</p><p class="q">&#8220;vigas were dragged from the ruined buildings and piled onto the blaze&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>4.</b> Heavy wooden ceiling beams in adobe construction, typically peeled logs running from wall to wall to support the roof; a defining feature of Spanish Colonial and Pueblo architecture in the Southwest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the boy reached along the top of one of the vigas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="vinegarroons"><b>vinegarroons</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="vinegarroon"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Whip scorpions (*Mastigoproctus giganteus*), large non-venomous arachnids with pincers, a whiplike tail, and glands that spray acetic acid (hence the name) when threatened; native to the arid Southwest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;solpugas and vinegarroons and the vicious mygale spiders&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="visage"><b>visage</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="visages"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> the face, or the expression on a face.</p><p class="q">&#8220;All history present in that visage&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="volunteers"><b>Volunteers at Monterrey</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="monterrey"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> Refers to the volunteer infantry and mounted units &#8212; from Tennessee, Texas, Mississippi, and other states &#8212; who fought at the Battle of Monterrey (September 21&#8211;24, 1846) during the Mexican-American War, where U.S. forces under General Zachary Taylor captured the fortified city of Monterrey, Nuevo Le&#243;n.</p><p class="q">&#8220;You werent with the Volunteers at Monterrey&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="vamonos"><b>V&#225;monos</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="vámonos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> &#8220;Let&#8217;s go&#8221; or &#8220;Move along.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;V&#225;monos, v&#225;monos, he called.&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> &#8220;Let&#8217;s go&#8221; or &#8220;Let&#8217;s get out of here&#8221;; a first-person plural imperative of ir, to go.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Vamonos, he said.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wadcutter"><b>wadcutter</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="wadcutters"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A tool or device for cutting circular wads of felt or cloth used as patch or projectile seating in muzzle-loading firearms.</p><p class="q">&#8220;little fitted compartments that held a wadcutter, a pewter powderflask&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wagon"><b>wagon-sheet</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="sheet"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A large canvas or heavy cloth cover stretched over a wagon; the same material used as a tent or shelter when stretched between wagon wheels or tied to other supports.</p><p class="q">&#8220;his pallet under a wagon-sheet&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wagonsheet"><b>wagonsheet</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="wagonsheets"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A large canvas or heavy cloth sheet used to cover a wagon&#8217;s load; here spread on the floor to move the dead bear.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they had rolled the dead bear onto a wagonsheet&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wainscotted"><b>wainscotted</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="wainscottedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> paneled with wood along the lower part of the walls.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;a long narrow hall wainscotted with varnished boards.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="waistcoat"><b>waistcoat</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="waistcoats"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A sleeveless, close-fitting garment worn under a jacket; a vest. The British term, used here in period context.</p><p class="q">&#8220;in his waistcoat he carried a watchchain and a stickpin&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="walkboard"><b>walkboard</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="walkboards"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A raised plank walkway or boardwalk in front of frontier buildings, keeping pedestrians out of the mud.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He went down the walkboard toward the jakes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="revolver"><b>Walker revolver</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="walker"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(named object)</i> The Colt Model 1847 Walker, a massive .44-caliber six-shot percussion revolver designed jointly by Samuel Colt and Texas Ranger Samuel Walker; the most powerful handgun of its era, weighing over four pounds.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the big Walker revolver&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wallet"><b>wallet</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="wallets"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Here an archaic sense: a saddlebag or small pack, not a billfold; a flat bag strapped behind the saddle for carrying provisions and personal effects.</p><p class="q">&#8220;began to go through the wallet strapped to the cantle&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wallets"><b>wallets</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="wallet"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> In archaic usage, large bags or sacks carried on a saddle or pack animal&#8212;not the flat pocket-sized item of modern usage.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he cut the straps and left the wallets to lay where they fell&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Here used in the archaic sense: large saddlebags or traveling bags (not the modern pocket billfold).</p><p class="q">&#8220;packing them away in his wallets&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="walleyed"><b>walleyed</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="walleyedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> having an eye that turns outward, so the gaze seems to point off to the side.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He was slightly walleyed&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wallow"><b>wallow</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="wallows"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A shallow hollow or depression in the ground, especially one made or used by animals to roll in dust or mud.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the kid on his belly in the sand wallow&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wallsconce"><b>wallsconce</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="wallsconces"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A wall-mounted bracket holding a candle or oil lamp; one of the oldest forms of fixed interior lighting.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the light from a wallsconce on the side of his face&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="waney"><b>waney</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="waneyly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Waning or diminishing; here describing the fading, dying-away whistle of arrows in flight as they pass.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a waney whistle like the flight of wild ducks&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="warner"><b>Warner&#8217;s Ranch</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ranch"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A historic rancho in present-day San Diego County, California, established in the 1840s by Juan Jos&#233; Warner on a Mexican land grant; it was a major waystation on the Southern Emigrant Trail and known for its hot sulphur springs.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They reached Warner&#8217;s Ranch late the following day&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wattled"><b>wattled huts</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="huts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Dwellings built by the wattle-and-daub method: a lattice of woven sticks or branches (the wattle) plastered over with mud or clay; a traditional and inexpensive construction technique.</p><p class="q">&#8220;narrow lanes where the wattled huts steamed in the heat&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wattles"><b>wattles</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="wattle"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Woven latticework of thin branches or sticks used as the structural infill of walls in wattle-and-daub construction; the woven wood framework that is then packed with mud or clay.</p><p class="q">&#8220;crude hut of mud and wattles&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="weft"><b>weft</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="wefts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The cross-threads woven through the warp in a fabric; by extension the interwoven fabric or texture of existence itself.</p><p class="q">&#8220;some misweave in the weft of things&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="weskit"><b>weskit</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="weskits"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A phonetic dialectal spelling of &#8220;waistcoat&#8221;: a sleeveless garment worn over the shirt and under a coat; a vest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A thin man in a leather weskit&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wesson"><b>Wesson rifle</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="rifle"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A heavy percussion target rifle made by Edwin Wesson (1811&#8211;1849) of Northboro, Massachusetts, considered the finest American target rifles of the era. They featured a false muzzle, vernier tang sight, and paper-patched bullets for extreme long-range accuracy.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a heavy Wesson rifle that used a false muzzle&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="whang"><b>whang</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="whangs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A strip or thong of rawhide or leather; used for lashing, binding, or stringing things together.</p><p class="q">&#8220;stringing up scalps on strips of leather whang&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="whinstone"><b>whinstone</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="whinstones"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> British quarrying term for any hard, dark, fine-grained rock &#8212; especially basalt, dolerite, or chert &#8212; used for road chippings and dry-stone walls; from 14th-century northern English &#8220;whin.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;they were climbing among shale and whinstone&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="whinstones"><b>whinstones</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="whinstone"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A British quarrying and geological term for any hard, dark rock, typically basalt or dolerite; used broadly in northern England and Scotland to denote resistant igneous stone.</p><p class="q">&#8220;stumbling among the whinstones of the uttermost ridge&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="whitneyville"><b>Whitneyville Colt</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="colt"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(named object)</i> The Colt Model 1847 Walker revolver, manufactured at Eli Whitney Jr.&#8217;s Whitneyville Armory in Connecticut under contract. A massive .44-caliber, six-shot pistol weighing 4.5 pounds with a nine-inch barrel, and at the time the most powerful handgun ever made; only 1,100 were produced in 1847.</p><p class="q">&#8220;one of the Whitneyville Colts that had belonged to the scouts&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="whitneyville"><b>Whitneyville Colts</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="colts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> The Colt Whitneyville-Hartford Dragoon revolver, a heavy six-shot percussion pistol manufactured c. 1847&#8211;48 partly at Eli Whitney&#8217;s factory in Whitneyville, Connecticut. Designed for U.S. Army dragoons, it weighed nearly five pounds loaded and fired a heavy conical ball.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Whitneyville Colts&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wickiup"><b>wickiup</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="wickiups"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A temporary dwelling used by Apache and other Southwest peoples; a framework of poles and branches covered with brush, bark, or hides.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Glanton rode his horse completely through the first wickiup&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A domed or oval hut used by various nomadic Native American peoples of the western and southwestern United States, typically built from a framework of branches covered with reed mats, grass, or brush; from a Fox or Menominee word for &#8220;house.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;They entered a wickiup of willowpoles and canvas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wickiups"><b>wickiups</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="wickiup"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Domed or conical temporary shelters built by bending and tying saplings into a frame and covering them with brush, bark, or grass mats; associated especially with Apache and other Southwestern peoples.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a few wickiups made of brush&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Domed or conical brush shelters used by Apache and other Southwestern peoples; built on a frame of poles covered with brush, grass, bark, or hides.</p><p class="q">&#8220;trampling down the grass wickiups and bludgeoning the shrieking householders&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> Temporary domed or conical shelters used by various Apache and other southwestern groups, made of a framework of bent poles covered with brush, grass, bark, or hides. The word is from a Fox/Algonquian language.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the sordid collection of leantos and wickiups thrown up with poles and hides and wagonsheets&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="will"><b>will or nill</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="nill"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> Whether he wills it or wills it not; willy-nilly; regardless of intention. &#8220;Nill&#8221; is an archaic verb meaning &#8220;to be unwilling.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Will or nill&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="windrows"><b>windrows</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="windrow"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Long, narrow ridges of material piled in a row; originally a harvesting term for cut hay raked into lines to dry. Here the bones have been stacked in parallel ridges ten feet high.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The bones had been gathered into windrows ten feet high&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="patches"><b>wiping patches</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="wiping"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Small fabric squares pushed through a rifle barrel with a ramrod to clean powder fouling between shots.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the wiping patches sizzled in the bore&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wiping"><b>wiping stick</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="stick"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A cleaning rod for a muzzle-loading rifle, used to swab the bore between shots; distinct from the ramrod used to load the weapon.</p><p class="q">&#8220;dismount with rifle and wiping stick&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="withers"><b>withers</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="wither"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The ridge between a horse&#8217;s shoulder blades, the highest point of the back; a standard anatomical term in horsemanship.</p><p class="q">&#8220;his grip and his rifle perched on the withers&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> The ridge between a horse&#8217;s shoulder blades, at the base of the neck; the highest point of the horse&#8217;s back and the standard point for measuring a horse&#8217;s height.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He patted it along the withers and spoke to it&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="withers"><b>withers strap</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="strap"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A strap running over the horse&#8217;s withers (the ridge between the shoulder blades at the base of the neck) to anchor the breast collar and keep tack in place.</p><p class="q">&#8220;dropping down off the sides of their mounts with one heel hung in the withers strap&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="withy"><b>withy</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="withies"/><idx:iform value="withyly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective / noun)</i> Made of or resembling withies &#8212; long, flexible twigs of willow or osier, used in basketry and woven construction.</p><p class="q">&#8220;finches hung in small withy cages&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wrack"><b>wrack</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="wracks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Debris or wreckage cast up or drifting; here, the scattered froth and detritus along the lakeshore.</p><p class="q">&#8220;along the beach there lay a wrack of foam&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Seaweed, driftwood, and other organic debris cast up and left on the beach by the tide; the tideline deposit of marine material.</p><p class="q">&#8220;lay in a rubbery wrack at the tideline&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tambien"><b>Y los indios tambien. Muchas veces llaman corno los coyotes.</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="corno"/><idx:iform value="coyotes"/><idx:iform value="indios"/><idx:iform value="llaman"/><idx:iform value="muchas"/><idx:iform value="veces"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;And the Indians too. Many times they call out like coyotes.&#8221; (Implying Indians and coyotes &#8212; and sorcerers &#8212; can be mistaken for one another in the dark.)</p><p class="q">&#8220;Y los indios tambien. Muchas veces llaman corno los coyotes.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tecolote"><b>Y que es eso? / Nada. / Un tecolote. Nada mas. / Quizas.</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="nada"/><idx:iform value="quizas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;And what is that? / Nothing. / An owl. Nothing more. / Perhaps.&#8221; (<em>Tecolote</em>: Mexican Spanish from Nahuatl <em>tecolotl</em>, owl; in Mexican folklore the owl&#8217;s call is an omen of death.)</p><p class="q">&#8220;Y que es eso? &#8230; Un tecolote. Nada mas. / Quizas.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="botas"><b>Y sus botas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Literally &#8220;And your boots&#8221;; the Texan translates the kid&#8217;s question about his boots into Spanish for the harnessmaker.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Y sus botas, said the Texan&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="yammer"><b>yammer</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="yammered"/><idx:iform value="yammering"/><idx:iform value="yammers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun/verb)</i> A persistent, high-pitched yelping or whining sound; here the continuous cry of prairie wolves.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the yammer and yap of the starving wolves&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="yammered"><b>yammered</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="yammer"/><idx:iform value="yammere"/><idx:iform value="yammereded"/><idx:iform value="yammereding"/><idx:iform value="yammereds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Made persistent, incoherent, or loud noise; cried out or babbled.</p><p class="q">&#8220;raised its hands to its face and yammered weirdly&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="indians"><b>Yaqui Indians</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="yaqui"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> The Yoeme (Yaqui), an indigenous people of the R&#237;o Yaqui valley in Sonora, Mexico, historically known for fierce resistance to Spanish and later Mexican colonization.</p><p class="q">&#8220;sullen groups of Yaqui indians in loincloths who would be hired for their labor&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="yaqui"><b>Yaqui River</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="river"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> The R&#237;o Yaqui, the largest river system in Sonora, Mexico; formed in the Sierra Madre Occidental and flowing south to the Gulf of California.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They forded the muddy Yaqui River&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="yarded"><b>yarded up</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Of deer or other game: gathered together in a sheltered area (a &#8220;yard&#8221;) during winter, staying close to cover and food sources rather than ranging freely.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they found deer yarded up in the meadows&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="yardfowl"><b>yardfowl</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="yardfowls"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Domestic poultry kept in a yard; chickens, turkeys, or similar birds.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Buzzards shuffled off through the chaff and plaster like enormous yardfowl&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="yuccas"><b>yuccas</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="yucca"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Plants of the genus <em>Yucca</em>, native to the arid Americas, with rosettes of stiff sword-like leaves and tall stalks bearing pale white bell-shaped flowers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the rising stalks of the yuccas with their pale blooms&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="yuma"><b>Yuma</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="yumas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place / proper noun)</i> The Quechan people (also called Yuma) are a Native American nation whose traditional territory lies at the confluence of the Colorado and Gila Rivers in present-day southwestern Arizona and southeastern California. They controlled a vital river crossing, known historically as Yuma Crossing, which was a key passage on the southern overland route to California.</p><p class="q">&#8220;out of the Yuma camp&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="yumas"><b>Yumas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The Quechan people (also called Yuma), a Native American nation whose traditional territory straddled the lower Colorado River at its junction with the Gila River in present-day southwestern Arizona and California. By 1849&#8211;1850 they operated a ferry service across the Colorado for California-bound travelers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Yumas&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>2.</b> The Quechan people, a Native American tribe of the lower Colorado River region at the confluence of the Gila and Colorado rivers; &#8220;Yuma&#8221; was the name applied to them by neighboring Pima and Papago tribes.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The Yumas attack&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>3.</b> The Quechan people (often called Yuma), a Native American nation living along the Colorado River at the present-day California&#8211;Arizona border; the same group who controlled the river crossing at Fort Yuma.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Pursued by the Yumas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="zinc"><b>zinc</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="zincs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Sheet zinc (a corrosion-resistant metal) used to surface bar tops in saloons, providing a durable, easy-to-clean working surface.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The bar was covered with zinc&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="andale"><b>&#193;ndale</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="andales"/><idx:iform value="ándale"/><idx:iform value="ándales"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> Mexican-Spanish exclamation meaning &#8220;go on,&#8221; &#8220;get out,&#8221; or &#8220;hurry up&#8221;; here a dismissive command to leave.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Andale, he said. He made a shooing motion.&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> Mexican colloquial: &#8220;Go ahead,&#8221; &#8220;Come on,&#8221; or &#8220;Hurry up.&#8221; From <em>andar</em> (to go, to walk).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Andale, he said&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>
