<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf">
<head><meta charset="utf-8"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="dict.css"/></head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bespoken"><b>bespoken</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bespokenly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Archaic past participle of &#8220;bespeak&#8221;: ordered or commissioned to individual specification; custom-tailored. The modern form is &#8220;bespoke.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;He stood in his bespoken suit with his hat in his hand&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="betelgeuse"><b>Betelgeuse</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="betelgeuses"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> A massive red supergiant star forming the right shoulder of the constellation Orion; one of the brightest and largest stars visible to the naked eye.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Orion and Betelgeuse turning overhead&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bexar"><b>Bexar</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bexars"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> Colloquial short form of San Antonio de B&#233;xar (present-day San Antonio, Texas); as drovers would speak of heading to town.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They was headed down for Bexar.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bier"><b>bier</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="biers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A frame or stand on which a coffin or corpse is placed for lying in state or being carried to burial; from Old English <em>b&#230;r</em>, related to &#8220;to bear/carry.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;a dead Christ in a glass bier&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A movable frame or platform on which a coffin or corpse is placed for transport or display at a funeral.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The pallbearers passed carrying on their shoulders a bier&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bight"><b>bight</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bights"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> a gentle curve or recess in a coastline; a broad, shallow bay.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;the thin bight of sand and scrub pine&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="biiscale"><b>Biiscale</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="biiscales"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> A phonetic spelling of B&#250;squele or B&#250;scale: &#8220;Search for him&#8221; or &#8220;Look for him&#8221; (from buscar, to search); the alcalde is telling Glanton to go find the man himself.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Biiscale. No man is here.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bipod"><b>bipod</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bipods"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A two-legged support for a rifle, allowing steady aimed fire from a prone or kneeling position. Here, screwed into a threaded fitting on the underside of the barrel.</p><p class="q">&#8220;screwing a bipod into the threaded boss on the underside of the barrel&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bistre"><b>bistre</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bistrely"/><idx:iform value="bistres"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective/noun)</i> A warm dark brownish-gray color, originally a pigment made from the soot of burned wood and used as a wash in Old Master drawings.</p><p class="q">&#8220;across the dry bistre land&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bivouacked"><b>bivouacked</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bivouack"/><idx:iform value="bivouacke"/><idx:iform value="bivouackeded"/><idx:iform value="bivouackeding"/><idx:iform value="bivouackeds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Made a temporary encampment in the open, without permanent shelter; from French <em>bivouac</em>, originally a military term for an overnight field camp.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He bivouacked in a barren swale&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bladebones"><b>bladebones</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bladebone"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Shoulder blades (scapulae) of animals &#8212; here, of butchered antelope, used as improvised digging tools.</p><p class="q">&#8220;dig their graves with the bladebones of antelope&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="blasarius"><b>Blasarius</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="blasariu"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(allusion)</i> A mock-Latin sobriquet coined by the judge; its etymology is uncertain, possibly playing on classical Latin roots. Used as a jesting name, not a real word or proper name.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Young Blasarius yonder&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bloodslaked"><b>bloodslaked</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bloodslakedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Saturated or quenched with blood &#8212; &#8220;slaked&#8221; in its original sense means satisfied or extinguished (as in slaking thirst or slaking lime). A compound adjective meaning the dust is soaked through with blood.</p><p class="q">&#8220;lay&#8230;in the bloodslaked dust&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="boatswain"><b>boatswain</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="boatswains"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun, nautical)</i> a ship&#8217;s officer in charge of the hull, rigging, and deck crew; pronounced &#8220;bosun.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;a Maltese boatswain shoots him in the back&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jachin"><b>Boaz and Jachin</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="boaz"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(allusion)</i> The two bronze pillars standing at the entrance to Solomon&#8217;s Temple (1 Kings 7); in tarot iconography they flank the High Priestess card, the one card in the juggler&#8217;s deck that the blindfolded woman is said to resemble.</p><p class="q">&#8220;between Boaz and Jachin inscribed upon the one card &#8230; they would not see come to light&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bobtails"><b>bobtails</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bobtail"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Rabble; the riffraff &#8212; from the old phrase &#8220;rag, tag, and bobtail&#8221; meaning the disreputable, low-class multitude; a bobtail is something curtailed or degraded. Contemporaneous U.S. military slang also used &#8220;bobtail&#8221; for a dishonorable discharge.</p><p class="q">&#8220;we dont want to look like bobtails&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bodega"><b>bodega</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bodegas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> A wine shop, tavern, or liquor store; in Mexico and the Southwest, a small bar or drinking establishment.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a lazarous bodega run by a Mexican&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="boletas"><b>boletas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Tickets, chits, or scrip; in the context of Mexican mines, company-issued paper tokens paid as wages in lieu of coin, redeemable only at the company store and heavily discounted by outside merchants&#8212;a tool of labor control. Singular <em>boleta</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a few boletas or notes of discounted script from the mines near Tubac&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bolls"><b>bolls</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="boll"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> the rounded seed-pods of the cotton plant, which split open to show the fiber.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;their fingers spiderlike among the bolls of cotton.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mapimi"><b>Bolson de Mapimi</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bolson"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A vast, landlocked desert basin in north-central Mexico, spanning parts of Chihuahua, Durango, Coahuila, and Zacatecas; roughly the southernmost reach of the Chihuahuan Desert.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Adrift on the Bolson de Mapimi&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="black"><b>bone-black</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bone"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A deep black pigment made from charred bones, used here smeared around the eyes to reduce glare reflected off the white gypsum pan, functioning like modern eye-black.</p><p class="q">&#8220;masks of bone-black smeared about their eyes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bonepickers"><b>bonepickers</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bonepicker"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Men who gathered the sun-bleached bones of slaughtered buffalo left on the plains and hauled them to railheads for sale to fertilizer and carbon manufacturers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The bonepickers&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="boneyard"><b>boneyard</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="boneyards"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An area strewn with bones or carcasses; a graveyard or place of death.</p><p class="q">&#8220;passed once more across the boneyard&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bootees"><b>bootees</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bootee"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Small or rudimentary boots; here used to describe the crude homemade footwear fashioned from animal hide.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the man now before them in his hides and his peculiar bootees&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="slick"><b>bore shot slick</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bore"/><idx:iform value="shot"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> The interior of the rifle barrel wore smooth from repeated firing, losing its rifling grooves and therefore its accuracy.</p><p class="q">&#8220;till the bore shot slick&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="boss"><b>boss</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A projecting knob or stud on a surface &#8212; here, a threaded metal fitting on the underside of the rifle barrel into which the bipod is screwed.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the threaded boss on the underside of the barrel&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A rounded protuberance or knob; here, the thick base of an animal&#8217;s horn where it meets the skull.</p><p class="q">&#8220;buried its horns to the boss in the ribs of a horse&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> A rounded protuberance or knob of rock; a dome-shaped outcrop of stone.</p><p class="q">&#8220;under a wooded boss&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="botanize"><b>botanize</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="botanized"/><idx:iform value="botanizes"/><idx:iform value="botanizing"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> To go into the field to collect and study plant specimens; to do fieldwork in botany, pressing and recording plants in their natural habitat.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The judge would stop to botanize&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="botas"><b>botas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Boots&#8221;; the harnessmaker&#8217;s one-word reply confirming he understands the request to repair the footwear.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Botas? Si.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bottomland"><b>bottomland</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bottomlands"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> low-lying ground along a river or creek, usually fertile and apt to flood.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;down the rainblown bottomland toward night.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bowie"><b>bowie</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bowies"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A Bowie knife: a large, heavy single-edged hunting and fighting knife with a clipped point, named after the American frontiersman Jim Bowie and widely used on the frontier in the 19th century.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Henderson Smith had drawn his bowie and half severed a man&#8217;s arm&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bowieknife"><b>bowieknife</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bowieknifes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun, named object)</i> <b>1.</b> a Bowie knife: a long, heavy, single-edged sheath knife associated with the frontiersman Jim Bowie.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;unsheathed an immense bowieknife from behind his neck.&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(named object)</i> <b>2.</b> A large fixed-blade fighting knife with a crossguard and a clipped point, associated with the American frontier fighter James Bowie, who made the design famous in the 1827 Sandbar Fight near Natchez; a standard weapon of the frontier era.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the black stepped out of the darkness bearing the bowieknife in both hands&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(named object)</i> <b>3.</b> A large fixed-blade fighting and hunting knife with a distinctive clipped point, associated with Jim Bowie and popularized on the American frontier in the 1830s. Blades typically 9&#8211;15 inches long.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A man with a bowieknife was offering to cut blades with anyone at a wager&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bowieknives"><b>bowieknives</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bowieknive"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Large single-edged fixed-blade knives, typically with a 9&#8211;15 inch blade and a clipped point, named after frontiersman Jim Bowie and popularized after the 1827 Sandbar Fight. A standard tool and weapon of the American frontier.</p><p class="q">&#8220;cutting up the gutted antelopes&#8230;with bowieknives&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bracken"><b>bracken</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="brackens"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Dense growth of ferns, especially the large coarse fern <em>Pteridium aquilinum</em>; used broadly for any thick, tangled undergrowth of ferns along a waterway.</p><p class="q">&#8220;shore bracken with arrows clattering through the cane&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bradded"><b>bradded</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bradd"/><idx:iform value="bradde"/><idx:iform value="braddeded"/><idx:iform value="braddeding"/><idx:iform value="braddedly"/><idx:iform value="braddeds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb / adjective)</i> Fastened with brads, which are small, thin nails with a small head; used to attach fittings to wood without splitting it.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a polished mahogany case with a brass nameplate bradded to the lid&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="brakes"><b>brakes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="brake"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Thickets of dense shrubs, reeds, or brushwood; clumps of undergrowth.</p><p class="q">&#8220;out of the willow brakes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="brand"><b>brand</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="brands"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A piece of burning or charred wood; a torch or firebrand taken from a fire. This is an archaic or literary sense distinct from the common modern meaning of a trademark or cattle brand.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Someone ran to the fire for a brand&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="breechclouts"><b>breechclouts</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="breechclout"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A simple loincloth garment consisting of a strip of cloth or hide passed between the legs and fastened to a belt; standard minimal dress for many Plains and southwestern Native American men.</p><p class="q">&#8220;naught but boots and breechclouts and the plumed hide helmets&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="brimstone"><b>brimstone</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="brimstones"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Elemental sulphur, the third component of black gunpowder (alongside saltpetre and charcoal); found deposited around volcanic craters.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Brimstone&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="broached"><b>broached</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="broach"/><idx:iform value="broache"/><idx:iform value="broacheded"/><idx:iform value="broacheding"/><idx:iform value="broachedly"/><idx:iform value="broacheds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> <b>1.</b> Here in its sense of collapsed or broken open; breached and tumbled down.</p><p class="q">&#8220;gray stone walls &#8230; lay broached and tumbled upon the plain&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> <b>2.</b> Opened, tapped, or broken into; here &#8220;the broached day&#8221; means the day that has just been pierced open&#8212;the moment of dawn.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The broached day discovered the same barren countryside&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> <b>3.</b> Tapped or opened (a cask) for the first time; to broach a keg means to pierce or open it to draw off the contents.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A keg of whiskey was broached&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bruited"><b>bruited</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bruit"/><idx:iform value="bruite"/><idx:iform value="bruiteded"/><idx:iform value="bruiteding"/><idx:iform value="bruiteds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Announced or heralded noisily; from Old French <em>bruire</em> (to roar or make noise).</p><p class="q">&#8220;The advent of the riders bruited by scurvid curs&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="buckbrush"><b>buckbrush</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="buckbrushes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A common name for low, thicket-forming shrubs of the Texas plains, chiefly coralberry (<em>Symphoricarpos orbiculatus</em>), a small deciduous shrub of the honeysuckle family.</p><p class="q">&#8220;scattered clumps of buckbrush and pricklypear&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bucklered"><b>bucklered</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="buckleredly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Equipped with or carrying a buckler&#8212;a small round shield held in the fist, used by soldiers and swordsmen from the medieval period onward.</p><p class="q">&#8220;mounted Spaniards helmeted and bucklered&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tardes"><b>Buenas tardes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="buenas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Good afternoon&#8221; or &#8220;Good evening&#8221;; a standard Spanish greeting used from midday onward.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Buenas tardes, he said.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="puedes"><b>Bueno &#8230; Puedes ver? / Nada?</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bueno"/><idx:iform value="nada"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Good &#8230; Can you see? / Nothing?&#8221; The juggler testing whether his blindfolded wife can see.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Bueno &#8230; Puedes ver? &#8212; No. &#8212; Nada?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="buenos"><b>Buenos dias &#8230; De donde viene?</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dias"/><idx:iform value="donde"/><idx:iform value="viene"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Good day &#8230; Where are you coming from?&#8221; <em>Buenos d&#237;as</em> = good morning/good day; <em>de d&#243;nde viene</em> = where do you come from (formal).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Buenos dias, he said. De donde viene?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bufones"><b>bufones</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Buffoons&#8221; or &#8220;jesters&#8221;; plural of <em>buf&#243;n</em>, a comic performer or clown.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A show &#8230; Bufones. &#8212; S&#237;, bufones.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bullwhacker"><b>bullwhacker</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bullwhackers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A driver of a bull (ox) team pulling a freight wagon on the frontier; from &#8220;bull&#8221; (ox) and &#8220;whack&#8221; (to drive with a whip).</p><p class="q">&#8220;herder and bullwhacker and drover and freighter&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bumpers"><b>bumpers</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bumper"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Glasses filled completely to the brim, raised in a toast; from the 17th-century drinking custom of filling a cup so full the liquid mounds above the rim.</p><p class="q">&#8220;catcalls, hoisted bumpers&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bung"><b>bung</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bungs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The stopper or plug that seals the hole (bunghole) of a barrel or keg; often a tapered wooden or cork plug.</p><p class="q">&#8220;This flask was fitted to the bung at the inside&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="starter"><b>bung-starter</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bung"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A heavy wooden mallet used to drive the bung (wooden plug) out of a barrel; routinely kept behind 19th-century bars and used as an improvised weapon against unruly patrons.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he was carrying a bung-starter in one hand&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bursar"><b>bursar</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bursars"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The treasurer or financial officer responsible for managing funds; here the state official who oversees payment of the scalp bounty.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The bursar was introduced to cheers, catcalls, hoisted bumpers.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="indios"><b>Buscan a los indios?</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="buscan"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Are you looking for the Indians?&#8221; &#8212; a mocking question directed at the two ragged survivors.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Buscan a los indios?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="buskins"><b>buskins</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="buskin"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Knee- or calf-high boots, originally associated with hunters and ancient theater; here indicating the Apache dead man&#8217;s tall, pointed footwear.</p><p class="q">&#8220;toes like buskins&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="butte"><b>butte</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="buttes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An isolated, flat-topped hill with steep sides, formed by erosion of the surrounding land; a smaller remnant of a mesa, common in the arid American West and northern Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Two nights later camped on a butte looking out over the broad central plain&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="buzzard"><b>buzzard</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="buzzards"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> in American usage, a vulture (here a turkey vulture circling high overhead).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Very high, very small, a buzzard.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="caballado"><b>caballado</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="caballados"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> A herd of horses belonging to a company or ranch (from Spanish <em>caballo</em>, horse); the collective riding stock, distinct from the working mounts in current use.</p><p class="q">&#8220;only three animals left in the caballado&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> Literally &#8220;horse herd&#8221;; a band of saddle horses maintained by a traveling party or ranch, from Spanish <em>caballada</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the lost warrior&#8217;s horse stood saddled in the caballado&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>3.</b> A herd or drove of horses (caballada); from Spanish caballo (horse).</p><p class="q">&#8220;round up the caballado and move out&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="caballeros"><b>caballeros</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Gentlemen&#8221; or &#8220;horsemen&#8221;; literally &#8220;knights&#8221; (from caballo, &#8220;horse&#8221;), used as a respectful or flattering form of address for mounted men.</p><p class="q">&#8220;You are fine caballeros, he said.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="caballo"><b>Caballo en Pelo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pelo"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> <b>1.</b> The Quechan (Yuma) chief whose name means &#8220;Bareback&#8221; in Spanish (<em>caballo</em> = horse; <em>en pelo</em> = riding without a saddle, bareback). He was a principal leader of the Quechan people at the Colorado River crossing during circa 1849&#8211;1850.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The leader was a man named Caballo en Pelo&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> <b>2.</b> Chief of the Quechan (Yuma) people; his name means &#8220;Bareback Horse&#8221; or &#8220;Bare Horse&#8221; in Spanish (caballo = horse, en pelo = bare, without tack). He led the April 23, 1850 Yuma massacre of the Glanton gang to reclaim the Colorado River ferry crossing.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Caballo en Pelo mounted into the actual bed with him&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cabildo"><b>cabildo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cabildos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> A Spanish colonial town hall and seat of local government; the building housing the municipal council (cabildo) and its offices, often including a jail.</p><p class="q">&#8220;crossing the plaza toward the little mud cabildo&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="caesura"><b>caesura</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="caesuras"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A pause or break in the middle of a line of verse; used broadly to mean an abrupt stop or interruption in flow or continuity.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a howl of such outrage as to stitch a caesura in the pulsebeat of the world&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cairn"><b>cairn</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cairns"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A human-made pile or stack of stones erected as a landmark, trail marker, or memorial.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the hole into which it had been set and the cairn of rocks about its base&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cairns"><b>cairns</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cairn"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Stacked piles of stones used as trail markers, grave markers, or memorials; here small heaps of stone propping roadside memorial crosses.</p><p class="q">&#8220;little wooden crosses propped in cairns of stone where travelers had met with death&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="caissons"><b>caissons</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="caisson"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Two-wheeled ammunition wagons used to carry artillery shells; here used loosely for any wagon or cart used to haul goods across the desert.</p><p class="q">&#8220;groups of folks clustered about a last wagon or cart&#8230; as if they bore in those frail caissons the covenant itself&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="calabozo"><b>calabozo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="calabozos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> A dungeon or holding cell; from Arabic <em>al-qal&#697;a</em> (fortress). English borrowed it as &#8220;calaboose&#8221; for a small local jail.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they had us in the calabozo&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="calcined"><b>calcined</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="calcinedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Reduced to powder or ash by prolonged heat; sun-bleached bones on the plains had lost their organic matter and become brittle white mineral matter, as if calcined in a furnace.</p><p class="q">&#8220;kicking down the calcined architecture&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="calculus"><b>calculus</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="calculu"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In anatomy, a hard concretion (stone) formed inside the body; here used interchangeably with &#8220;madstone.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;a calculus or madstone from the inward parts of some beast&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="caldera"><b>caldera</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="calderas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A large bowl-shaped depression formed by the collapse of a volcanic cone after an eruption empties the underlying magma chamber; from Spanish <em>caldera</em>, cauldron.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a bleak and barren caldera where lay the abandoned ruins of Santa Rita del Cobre&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="caldron"><b>caldron</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="caldrons"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A large, deep vessel for boiling; here applied to the crater of a volcano, whose bowl-like interior resembles such a pot.</p><p class="q">&#8220;throw ourselves into the caldron&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="callego"><b>Callego</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="callegos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A small settlement in Chihuahua state, Mexico, north of the state capital; in the text the gang passes through it while being pursued south toward Ciudad de Chihuahua.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the town of Gallego&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="calzones"><b>calzones</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Trousers or drawers; loose breeches (from Spanish <em>calz&#243;n</em>).</p><p class="q">&#8220;a pair of old calzones&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cameo"><b>cameo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cameos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Literally, a small carved portrait in relief; here used figuratively to describe the moonlight-cast silhouette of the riders on the plain, sharp and distinct as an engraving.</p><p class="q">&#8220;sketching on the plain below a blue cameo of such dread pilgrims&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="campesinos"><b>campesinos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Rural peasants or smallholder farmers; from <em>campo</em> (field).</p><p class="q">&#8220;a party of campesinos had been hacked to death with their own hoes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="canon"><b>canon</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="canons"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In a religious or institutional sense, the officially recognized and established body of rules, rites, or doctrines of a church or other authority; the set of practices formally sanctioned by an institution.</p><p class="q">&#8220;some ritual not yet inaugurated into any canon&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cantina"><b>cantina</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cantinas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> A bar or tavern, especially in a Spanish-speaking country or the American Southwest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A Mexican cantina &#8212; Another fight&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> Literally &#8220;tavern&#8221; or &#8220;bar&#8221;; a drinking and gambling establishment common in Mexico and the American Southwest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A cantina in the Laredito&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>3.</b> A bar or tavern, especially in Mexico or the southwestern United States.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they paused without the cantina&#8230;&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>4.</b> A bar or tavern; in Mexico and the American Southwest, a drinking establishment where liquor is sold and consumed on the premises.</p><p class="q">&#8220;there was a cantina and here the company dismounted&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cantle"><b>cantle</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cantles"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The raised rear portion of a saddle that supports the rider&#8217;s lower back and prevents sliding backward; the opposite end from the pommel.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The sergeant placed a hand on the cantle&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> The raised rear part of a saddle; a rider places a hand on it when turning to look behind.</p><p class="q">&#8220;placed one hand on the wooden cantle&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> The raised rear part of a saddle, opposite the pommel at the front.</p><p class="q">&#8220;jammed it among his belongings lashed to the cantle&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cantonment"><b>cantonment</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cantonments"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A military encampment or set of temporary quarters; here applied to the compound of the old presidio used as a camp.</p><p class="q">&#8220;emerged and stood about the cantonment&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="caparisoned"><b>caparisoned</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="caparisonedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Decked out in ornamental coverings or trappings; specifically, a horse fitted with decorative harness and cloth covers over the saddle.</p><p class="q">&#8220;their mounts were nicely caparisoned&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="capbox"><b>capbox</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="capboxes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A small spring-loaded compartment built into the stock of a percussion firearm for storing spare percussion caps; typically a hinged metal box set into the butt.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the wood&#8230; held a small springloaded silver capbox in the toe&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="carbolic"><b>carbolic</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="carbolics"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Carbolic acid (phenol), a coal-tar derivative used in the 19th century as a disinfectant, especially around corpses and in hospitals.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a faint miasma of carbolic&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="carboy"><b>carboy</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="carboys"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A large glass bottle, typically several gallons in volume, traditionally enclosed in a wicker or wooden frame for protection, used to store and transport liquids; from Persian <em>qarābah</em>, &#8220;large jug.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;all came at last before a trestle whereon stood a glass carboy of clear mescal&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="carcaj"><b>Carcaj</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="carcajs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A mountain range in northwestern Chihuahua, Mexico, lying to the west of the Casas Grandes valley; a regional geographic landmark in the borderlands.</p><p class="q">&#8220;To the west lay the ragged Carcaj&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="carcel"><b>carcel</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="carcels"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> Literally &#8220;jail&#8221; or &#8220;prison&#8221;; a municipal lockup or county jail.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the high walls of the carcel with the broken glass imbedded in the topmost course&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> Jail or prison.</p><p class="q">&#8220;It aint like the carcel.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="carnelian"><b>carnelian</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="carnelians"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A translucent, reddish-orange variety of chalcedony (a form of quartz), used as a semi-precious gemstone; its color comes from iron oxide.</p><p class="q">&#8220;tiny blocks of jasper, carnelian, agate&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="carreta"><b>carreta</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="carretas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> A heavy, solid-timber ox-cart used throughout colonial and 19th-century Mexico; typically made entirely of wood with solid wheels cut from cross-sections of a tree trunk, the main freight vehicle of the northern Mexican frontier.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they came upon a carreta in the trace, tilted on its tongue, the great wheels cut from rounds of a cottonwood trunk&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> A basic two-wheeled ox-cart or wagon common throughout colonial and 19th-century Mexico and the American Southwest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;followed by a rude carreta in which sat a carved wooden skeleton&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="carrizal"><b>Carrizal</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="carrizals"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A small town in the municipality of Ahumada in the state of Chihuahua, Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Carrizal &#8212; A desert spring&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="carrizo"><b>Carrizo Creek</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="creek"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A desert water source in present-day Imperial County, California, on the Southern Emigrant Trail; one of the first reliably flowing springs travellers reached after crossing the Colorado Desert.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Carrizo Creek&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="muertos"><b>Carroza de muertos, llena de huesos</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="carroza"/><idx:iform value="huesos"/><idx:iform value="llena"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;A chariot of the dead, full of bones.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Carroza de muertos, llena de huesos.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cartouche"><b>cartouche</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cartouches"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An oval or shield-shaped decorative frame enclosing an official emblem or seal; here the stamped insignia of the state of Chihuahua on the canvas payment bag.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the long canvas bag stamped with the state cartouche&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="grandes"><b>Casas Grandes River</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="casas"/><idx:iform value="river"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A river in northwestern Chihuahua, Mexico, flowing through the valley of the same name; a tributary of the larger river system south of the New Mexico border.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they crossed the stony bottom of the Casas Grandes River&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="casimero"><b>Casimero! Los perros!</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="perros"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Casimiro! The dogs!&#8221; A call to the boy to fetch the performing dogs.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Casimero! Los perros!&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cassinette"><b>cassinette</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cassinettes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A lightweight twilled wool or wool-blend cloth (a variety of cassimere or casimir); a thin, serviceable men&#8217;s suiting fabric popular in the 19th century, woven in a diagonal twill.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a pair of pantaloons of gray cassinette&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cassiopeia"><b>Cassiopeia</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cassiopeias"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> A prominent constellation of the northern sky, named for the mythological queen of Ethiopia. Its five brightest stars form a distinctive W- or M-shape. It is circumpolar from mid-northern latitudes, never setting below the horizon, and is one of the most recognizable star patterns in the night sky.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the constellation of Cassiopeia burned like a witch&#8217;s signature&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="castroville"><b>Castroville</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="castrovilles"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A town 25 miles west of San Antonio on the Medina River, founded in 1844 by empresario Henri Castro with Alsatian settlers. In the 1840s it was the westernmost Anglo settlement in Texas and a waypoint on the road toward the Mexican border.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They rode through Castroville&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="catafalque"><b>catafalque</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="catafalques"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A raised, decorated platform or bier supporting a coffin or effigy during a funeral or memorial procession; often draped in black cloth.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a horsedrawn cart that bore a rude Christ in a stained and ancient catafalque&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="catclaw"><b>catclaw</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="catclaws"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A thorny shrub of the genus Senegalia (formerly Acacia) common in the Chihuahuan and Sonoran deserts; its small, curved thorns resemble a cat&#8217;s claw and catch on skin and clothing.</p><p class="q">&#8220;among catclaw and crucifixion thorn&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cauls"><b>cauls</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="caul"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The amniotic membrane that sometimes covers a newborn&#8217;s head at birth; here used figuratively for the clotted, mask-like coating of dried blood left on the scalped skulls of the dead.</p><p class="q">&#8220;rawskulled and strange in their bloody cauls&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cazando"><b>Cazando las almas</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="almas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Hunting the souls.&#8221; From <em>cazar</em> (to hunt) and <em>almas</em> (souls).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Cazando las almas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="centavos"><b>Centavos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> The small copper coins that are one-hundredth of a Mexican peso; in the mid-nineteenth century the smallest everyday denomination used for minor transactions.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Centavos, said Bathcat.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="centroids"><b>centroids</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="centroid"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Geometric or physical centers of mass of a figure or system; here used metaphorically to describe Glanton&#8217;s eyes as concentrated, blazing focal points of lethal intent.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Glanton&#8217;s eyes in their dark sockets were burning centroids of murder&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cetus"><b>Cetus</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> A large constellation of the equatorial sky, traditionally figured as a sea monster (Latin for &#8220;whale&#8221; or &#8220;sea beast&#8221;); visible in the southern sky in autumn and winter.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Cetus out there fording the void&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chambered"><b>chambered</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chamberedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Divided or layered into distinct sections or compartments; here used to describe smoke that has settled into separated, stratified masses in the night air, as if partitioned into chambers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the smoke stood gray and chambered in the night&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chamfering"><b>chamfering</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chamferings"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The cutting or gnawing of a beveled or angled groove along an edge; here used to describe the light angled chewing of mice along the edges of exposed wood.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a light chamfering of miceteeth along the edges of the wood&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chancel"><b>chancel</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chancels"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The area of a church around the altar, typically raised above the nave and reserved for the clergy; the liturgical east end.</p><p class="q">&#8220;three buzzards hobbled about on the picked bone carcass&#8230; dead in the chancel&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> The area of a church around and including the altar, typically raised above the nave and reserved for clergy; the sacred eastern end of a traditional church layout, from Latin <em>cancellus</em>, &#8220;lattice&#8221; (referring to the dividing screen).</p><p class="q">&#8220;a dead Christ in a glass bier lay broken in the chancel floor&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> The part of a church near the altar, reserved for clergy and choir; typically the eastern end of the nave beyond the screen or rail.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they were slain and scalped in the chancel floor&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chancre"><b>chancre</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chancres"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A hard, painless ulcerous sore, most familiarly the primary lesion of syphilis; here used as a vivid metaphor for the volcanic peak&#8217;s raw, cratered form rising from the desert.</p><p class="q">&#8220;that dead cone where it rose off the desert like a great chancre&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chaparral"><b>chaparral</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chaparrals"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Dense, thorny low scrub vegetation typical of arid and semi-arid regions, dominated by drought-resistant shrubs such as scrub oak and manzanita; from Spanish *chaparro* (dwarf oak).</p><p class="q">&#8220;They flushed snorting into the chaparral&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Dense, scrubby vegetation typical of dry southwestern landscapes, consisting of low-growing shrubs, thorny plants, and brush; from Spanish <em>chaparro</em> (dwarf evergreen oak).</p><p class="q">&#8220;ringdoves rose out of the chaparral&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="charger"><b>charger</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chargers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A small measured container or tube used to pour a precise charge of powder into a gun barrel when loading; a powder measure.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he scooped his charger full and he charged both barrels&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="charivari"><b>charivari</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="charivaris"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A deliberately noisy, discordant mock serenade or raucous public din, traditionally used to shame community members who violated social norms.</p><p class="q">&#8220;ringing the churchbells with pistolballs in a godless charivari&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chased"><b>chased</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chasedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> <b>1.</b> Decorated by hammering with small punches and chisels to produce ornamental patterns in low relief; unlike engraving, no metal is removed.</p><p class="q">&#8220;ivory hilts and nicely chased blades&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> <b>2.</b> Decorated by engraving or embossing a pattern into metal; the term refers to the craft of ornamenting metal surfaces with incised designs.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the locks and the hammers were chased with scrollwork&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chattels"><b>chattels</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chattel"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> movable possessions; personal belongings.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;settlers with their chattels&#8230;&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Moveable personal possessions or property; from Old French <em>chatel</em> (property).</p><p class="q">&#8220;crouched &#8230; among their strange chattels&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> Personal moveable possessions; property other than real estate, including furniture, livestock, tools, and goods.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Their chattels were scattered about over the sand&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="checkpiece"><b>checkpiece</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="checkpieces"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The raised or shaped portion on the side of a rifle stock against which the shooter rests his cheek when aiming; a standard furniture element of a long gun.</p><p class="q">&#8220;set with silver wire under the checkpiece in latin&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cheekpiece"><b>cheekpiece</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cheekpieces"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A shaped extension on the stock of a rifle against which the shooter presses his cheek to align his eye with the sights.</p><p class="q">&#8220;laid his face against the cheekpiece&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chert"><b>chert</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cherts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A hard, fine-grained sedimentary rock made of microcrystalline silica; it fractures with very sharp edges and was widely used by prehistoric peoples to make cutting tools. Flint is a variety of chert.</p><p class="q">&#8220;with a piece of broken chert he scappled away one of the designs&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chevrons"><b>chevrons</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chevron"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> V-shaped marks or patterns &#8212; here, V-shaped painted designs on the ponies&#8217; hides. Also used for military rank insignia (V-shaped sleeve stripes).</p><p class="q">&#8220;the painted chevrons and the hands and rising suns&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chihuahua"><b>Chihuahua</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chihuahuas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> Capital city (and name of the surrounding state) of the largest state in Mexico, located in the northern Sierra Madre region; a major center during the Mexican&#8211;American War, taken by Doniphan&#8217;s forces in 1847.</p><p class="q">&#8220;how they&#8217;d taken the city of Chihuahua&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chihuahua"><b>Chihuahua City</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="city"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> <b>1.</b> The capital of the Mexican state of Chihuahua, in northern Mexico; a major political and commercial center of the northern frontier, captured by Doniphan&#8217;s Missouri volunteers in February 1847.</p><p class="q">&#8220;when Colonel Doniphan took Chihuahua City&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> <b>2.</b> The capital city of the Mexican state of Chihuahua; in the mid-19th century it was the main administrative center of the northern Mexican frontier and a base of operations for the Glanton gang&#8217;s scalp-hunting contracts.</p><p class="q">&#8220;thirty-eight men when we left Chihuahua City&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="children"><b>children of Ham</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(allusion)</i> A biblical reference to Ham, son of Noah (Genesis 9); his descendants were historically (and falsely) used by pro-slavery interpreters to argue that dark-skinned African peoples were divinely cursed to servitude.</p><p class="q">&#8220;references to the children of Ham&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chimeras"><b>chimeras</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chimera"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Impossible or fanciful creatures; from the Chimera of Greek mythology, a fire-breathing monster composed of parts of different animals. Here meaning wild, impossible visions or figments.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a trance bepopulate with chimeras having neither analogue nor precedent&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chimeric"><b>chimeric</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chimericly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Resembling a chimera; wildly fanciful and monstrous in form, like the fire-breathing hybrid beast of Greek myth made of lion, goat, and serpent.</p><p class="q">&#8220;immense and chimeric&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chines"><b>chines</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chine"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Narrow ravines or gorges cutting through a ridge; steep-sided clefts in a hillside or ridgeline. Primarily used in English dialect (especially southern England) for coastal gorges, here applied to rocky desert ridges.</p><p class="q">&#8220;running down the narrow chines of the ridges&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Bare ridges or spines of rock projecting along a hillside or mountainside; the exposed backbone of a rocky formation.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the naked chines of rock blown bare of snow&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chiricahua"><b>Chiricahua</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chiricahuas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> A band of the Apache people whose territory spanned southeastern Arizona, southwestern New Mexico, and the adjacent mountains of northern Sonora and Chihuahua; among the most formidable raiders in the borderlands, with leaders including Cochise and Geronimo.</p><p class="q">&#8220;small scattered bands of Chiricahua raiders&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chiricahuas"><b>Chiricahuas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> One of the main divisions of the Apache people, whose traditional territory covered southeastern Arizona, southwestern New Mexico, and adjacent northern Mexico. In 1849 they were the dominant hostile force along this stretch of the Santa Cruz corridor.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The Chiricahuas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>
