<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf">
<head><meta charset="utf-8"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="dict.css"/></head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chits"><b>chits</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chit"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Small tokens or tickets used in lieu of cash; here brass tokens paid at the door of the dance hall.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A woman was taking chits from the men&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cholla"><b>cholla</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chollas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Any of several cylindrical-stemmed cacti of the genus <em>Cylindropuntia</em>, covered in dense, barbed spines that detach easily; common in the Chihuahuan Desert.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They rode up through cholla and nopal&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Any of several jointed, cylindrical cacti of the genus *Cylindropuntia*, found in the Sonoran and Chihuahuan deserts; the barbed spines on detachable segments cling readily to skin and clothing, earning some species the name &#8220;jumping cholla.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;low rolling hills covered with cholla and whitethorn&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> Any of several species of cactus (<em>Cylindropuntia</em>) of the Sonoran Desert, notorious for their densely barbed, easily detachable spine-covered joints that hook onto passing animals or clothing as if thrown.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the terrain was thick with cholla and clumps of it clung to the horses&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>4.</b> Cacti of the genus <em>Cylindropuntia</em>, native to the Southwest U.S. and northern Mexico, with cylindrical segmented stems covered in densely barbed spines that detach on contact; notoriously painful to carry against bare skin.</p><p class="q">&#8220;men who bore on their naked backs great loads of cholla&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chorines"><b>chorines</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chorine"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Chorus girls; female dancers or singers in a theatrical chorus line. The image compares the buzzards&#8217; outstretched wings to the soiled skirts and poses of showgirls.</p><p class="q">&#8220;like soiled chorines, their boiled-looking heads jerking obscenely&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chromo"><b>chromo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="chromos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Short for chromolithograph: a cheap color print produced by lithography, typically garish and sentimental; common 19th-century wall art.</p><p class="q">&#8220;like something from a chromo of terrific war&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ciboleros"><b>ciboleros</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Hispanic buffalo hunters from New Mexico (from Spanish <em>c&#237;bolo</em>, bison) who rode onto the southern Great Plains, hunted bison with lances, and brought dried meat and hides back to market; a recognized trade group of the 18th and 19th centuries.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The ciboleros&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ciborium"><b>ciborium</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ciboriums"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A liturgical vessel used in the Catholic Mass: a rounded, lidded cup, typically gold-lined, used to hold and distribute consecrated communion hosts.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he held the coin in both hands before him like a small ciborium&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cigarillo"><b>cigarillo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cigarillos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> A short, thin cigar; diminutive of cigarro (&#8220;cigar&#8221;), from Spanish with the diminutive suffix &#8211;illo.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the other was outstretched on his knee holding a slender black cigarillo&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A small, thin cigar; diminutive of Spanish cigarro.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he held it to the cigarillo in his mouth&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> A small, thin cigar; from Spanish diminutive of *cigarro*. Here pressed against the vent hole to fire an improvised musket.</p><p class="q">&#8220;fired by jamming a cigarillo against the vent in the barrel&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cigarillos"><b>cigarillos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Small, thin cigars (diminutive of Spanish <em>cigarro</em>, cigar).</p><p class="q">&#8220;the ciboleros lighted their small cigarillos&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cinched"><b>cinched</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cinch"/><idx:iform value="cinche"/><idx:iform value="cincheded"/><idx:iform value="cincheding"/><idx:iform value="cincheds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> tightened the cinch, the girth strap that holds a saddle on a horse or mule.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;got the saddle over it and got it cinched&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cincuenta"><b>Cincuenta centavos</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="centavos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Fifty centavos.&#8221; A <em>centavo</em> is one hundredth of a Mexican peso.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Cin-cuenta centavos, he said&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cinderland"><b>cinderland</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cinderlands"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A landscape of volcanic cinder and ash &#8212; a barren, heat-blasted terrain of dark clinker and lava fragments offering neither water nor shade; McCarthy&#8217;s coinage for the forbidding volcanic desert of northern Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they walked the cinderland till they were near to fainting&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ciphered"><b>ciphered out</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> Archaic/dialectal: figured out, decoded, or read (as in working out figures or a cipher).</p><p class="q">&#8220;his own name which nowhere else could he have ciphered out&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cirrus"><b>cirrus</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cirru"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The highest, thin wispy clouds, made of ice crystals and found at great altitudes; here the inverted riders appear to trample them from above.</p><p class="q">&#8220;trampling down the high thin cirrus&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="chihuahua"><b>Ciudad de Chihuahua</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ciudad"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> &#8220;The city of Chihuahua&#8221;; the capital of Chihuahua state, Mexico, founded 1709, and by 1849 the principal city and administrative centre of the northern Mexican frontier.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Ciudad de Chihuahua&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="clackdish"><b>clackdish</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="clackdishes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A beggar&#8217;s dish fitted with a movable lid that the beggar would clatter loudly to attract attention and solicit alms; common in medieval and early modern England, from <em>clack</em> (to clatter) + <em>dish</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Dark coppers in a clackdish&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="clanton"><b>Clanton</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="clantons"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> McCarthy&#8217;s variant spelling of John Joel Glanton (1819&#8211;1850), a Texas Ranger and Mexican&#8211;American War veteran who led a company of scalp hunters in northern Mexico and the southwestern United States around 1849&#8211;1850.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Clanton and the judge&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="clark"><b>Clark</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="clarks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun / person)</i> J. Desmond Clark (1916&#8211;2002), a British-born archaeologist at the University of California, Berkeley who co-led fieldwork in Ethiopia&#8217;s Middle Awash.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Clark, who led last year&#8217;s expedition&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="claymores"><b>claymores</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="claymore"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Large Scottish two-handed broadswords (from Gaelic <em>claidheamh m&#243;r</em>, &#8220;great sword&#8221;); used here hyperbolically to convey the enormous size of the bowie knives.</p><p class="q">&#8220;bowieknives the size of claymores&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cleaning"><b>cleaning jags</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="jags"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Small pointed or pronged metal tips that attach to a cleaning rod and grip a cloth patch, used to push solvent and remove fouling from a gun barrel.</p><p class="q">&#8220;cleaning jags, a patent pewter capper&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="brazos"><b>Clear Fork of the Brazos River</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="clear"/><idx:iform value="fork"/><idx:iform value="river"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A tributary of the Brazos River in Shackelford County, northwest Texas, running past Fort Griffin.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the McKenzie crossing of the Clear Fork of the Brazos River&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="closenapped"><b>closenapped beaver hats</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="beaver"/><idx:iform value="hats"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Hats made of felt produced from beaver fur, with a short, dense pile (&#8220;close nap&#8221;); the finest and most expensive hats of the era, produced in North America and Europe through the 19th century.</p><p class="q">&#8220;closenapped beaver hats and fine Spanish leather boots&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="closet"><b>closet</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="closets"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Archaic term for a privy or water closet; the toilet seat or wooden box within the outhouse.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The judge was seated upon the closet&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cock"><b>cock</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cocks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The hammer of a flintlock, the jaw-like arm clamping the flint that snaps forward to strike the frizzen when the trigger is pulled.</p><p class="q">&#8220;shoved back the cock with the heel of his hand&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cockpit"><b>cockpit</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cockpits"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The arena where cockfights are staged &#8212; a circular pit bounded by wood or wire with tiered seating for spectators placing bets; here used in its gambling-venue sense.</p><p class="q">&#8220;every cockpit and doggery&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="coiffure"><b>coiffure</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="coiffures"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> a hairstyle; the way the hair is arranged.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;his hair was plastered up with mud in a bizarre and primitive coiffure.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="blackstone"><b>Coke and Blackstone</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="coke"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(allusion)</i> The two canonical authorities of English common law. Sir Edward Coke (1552&#8211;1634), whose <em>Institutes of the Lawes of England</em> was the foundational common-law text; and Sir William Blackstone (1723&#8211;1780), whose <em>Commentaries on the Laws of England</em> (1765&#8211;1769) was the backbone of American legal education through the 19th century.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He quoted Coke and Blackstone, Anaximander, Thales.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="coldforger"><b>coldforger</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="coldforgers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A craftsman who shapes metal without heating it, using hammer and die; cold forging was used in striking coins, making it relevant to counterfeiting.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he was a coldforger who worked with hammer and die&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="carrasco"><b>Colonel Carrasco</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="colonel"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> Colonel Jos&#233; Mar&#237;a Carrasco, a Mexican Army officer commanding troops in Sonora circa 1849&#8211;1851; historically documented as a military commander frustrated by the Mexican central government&#8217;s failure to protect Sonora from Apache raids.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Colonel Carrasco is asking for American intervention&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="doniphan"><b>Colonel Doniphan</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="colonel"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> Colonel Alexander William Doniphan (1808&#8211;1887), commander of the First Missouri Mounted Volunteers in the Mexican-American War; he led a celebrated 3,600-mile march that culminated in routing a much larger Mexican force at the Battle of Rio Sacramento and capturing Chihuahua City in February 1847.</p><p class="q">&#8220;when Colonel Doniphan took Chihuahua City he inflicted over a thousand casualties&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="comanche"><b>Comanche</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="comanches"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> A powerful Native American people of the Southern Plains, renowned as expert horsemen and fierce warriors who dominated a vast territory (the Comancheria) across present-day Texas, Oklahoma, and surrounding regions.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the encounter with the Comanche&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="combers"><b>combers</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="comber"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Long, rolling ocean waves that curl over and break as they approach shore.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the long pale combers loped out of the night&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="commissary"><b>commissary</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="commissaries"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> In a military or frontier context, the supply operation providing food and provisions to a column or post; the store or depot where such goods are kept and distributed.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he keeps his commissary&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Provisions or supplies; the army department responsible for supplying troops with food and materiel; used loosely here to mean whatever food and goods they requisitioned.</p><p class="q">&#8220;took what they required by way of commissary from the pueblos and estancias&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="como"><b>Como</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="comos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;What?&#8221; or &#8220;How?&#8221;; used here as a bewildered exclamation of incomprehension, equivalent to &#8220;Pardon?&#8221; or &#8220;What do you mean?&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Como? wheezed the old man.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="como"><b>Como?</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="comos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;What?&#8221; or &#8220;How?&#8221;; used colloquially as an expression of disbelief or a request to repeat, equivalent to &#8220;Pardon?&#8221; or &#8220;How so?&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Como? said Mangas.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="concho"><b>Concho</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="conchos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> The Concho River, a tributary of the Colorado River in west-central Texas, flowing through present-day San Angelo; it marks the southern boundary of the main Texas buffalo range described here.</p><p class="q">&#8220;between the Arkansas River and the Concho&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="concomitant"><b>concomitant</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="concomitantly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Occurring or existing concurrently; accompanying as a secondary circumstance. From Latin <em>concomitari</em>, to accompany.</p><p class="q">&#8220;whether his history should run concomitant with men and nations&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="conducta"><b>conducta</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="conductas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A guarded mule train or pack convoy, especially one carrying bullion or quicksilver; used throughout colonial and 19th-century Mexico for transporting precious materials between mines and ports.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The conducta&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="conductor"><b>conductor</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="conductors"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Here in its 19th-century American sense: the leader or organizer of a wagon train or overland party; one hired to guide travelers through the wilderness.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he hired out to an independent conductor from the state of Missouri&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="congress"><b>congress</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="congres"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> sexual intercourse.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;for having congress with a goat.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="conquistador"><b>conquistador</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="conquistadors"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> A conqueror &#8212; specifically, one of the Spanish soldier-adventurers who invaded and subjugated the Americas in the 16th century for the Spanish Crown.</p><p class="q">&#8220;one in the armor of a Spanish conquistador&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="consumption"><b>consumption</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="consumptions"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Archaic name for tuberculosis (TB), so called because the disease appeared to &#8220;consume&#8221; the sufferer from within; the leading cause of death in 19th-century America and Europe.</p><p class="q">&#8220;I got consumption&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cooper"><b>cooper pro-tem</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun / phrase)</i> A barrel-maker appointed temporarily for the occasion; <em>pro tem</em> is Latin for <em>pro tempore</em>, meaning &#8220;for the time being.&#8221; A cooper is a craftsman who makes and repairs barrels, casks, and kegs.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a man Glanton had appointed cooper pro-tern to the expedition&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cooperage"><b>cooperage</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cooperages"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The craft or trade of making casks, barrels, and tubs from shaped wooden staves bound with hoops; also, the product of that work.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A new cooperage&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="coping"><b>coping</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="copings"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The top course of stones or masonry on a wall; here the stone rim encircling the mouth of the well.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the kid took the bucket from the stone coping&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="corbels"><b>corbels</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="corbel"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Projecting brackets of stone or wood built into a wall to carry a load above &#8212; a beam, arch, or overhanging element; integral to the wall structure, from Old French for &#8220;raven&#8221; (for their beak-like shape).</p><p class="q">&#8220;buzzards squatting among the old carved wooden corbels&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cordilleras"><b>cordilleras</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> A chain or system of mountain ranges; from Spanish <em>cordillera</em> (&#8220;rope, cord&#8221;), used for any major parallel range system. Here referring to the Sierra Madre ranges of northern Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the blue cordilleras stood footed in their paler image&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="corpus"><b>corpus</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="corpu"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Latin for &#8220;body&#8221;; used here in its literal sense to mean the judge&#8217;s vast physical body.</p><p class="q">&#8220;not a hair to be seen anywhere upon that vast corpus&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Latin for &#8220;body&#8221;; here used to describe the judge&#8217;s enormous physical bulk.</p><p class="q">&#8220;That great corpus enshadowed him&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="corralitos"><b>Corralitos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A mining and smelting town in northern Chihuahua, Mexico, site of silver and lead ore workings; in McCarthy&#8217;s period a functioning industrial settlement with smelter furnaces.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The town of Corralitos&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="corrida"><b>corrida</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="corridas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Short for <em>corrida de toros</em>, a bullfight; the ritual public contest in which matadors fight bulls, often to the death, with the bull&#8217;s meat distributed afterward.</p><p class="q">&#8220;From the corrida. You&#8217;ll get it of a Sunday night.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cortege"><b>cortege</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="corteges"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A solemn ceremonial procession, especially a funeral procession. From French cort&#232;ge.</p><p class="q">&#8220;paying their respects to the passing cortege&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="coulee"><b>coulee</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="coulees"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> From French Canadian <em>coul&#233;e</em>; in the American West, a steep-sided dry or intermittent ravine or valley, often a former watercourse.</p><p class="q">&#8220;scattered about below him in a stone coulee dead in their blood&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="coulees"><b>coulees</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="coulee"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Steep-sided gullies or ravines, usually dry or intermittently filled with water, cut into hillsides by erosion; from Canadian French <em>coul&#233;e</em>, &#8220;a flow.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;blue coulees on the north slopes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cowled"><b>cowled</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cowledly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Wearing or enveloped in a cowl &#8212; a monk&#8217;s deep hood or hooded cloak; here describing the riders hooded in animal skins.</p><p class="q">&#8220;so cowled in these primitive skins&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="coyame"><b>Coyame</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="coyames"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A small town in the state of Chihuahua, Mexico, roughly eighty miles northeast of Chihuahua City.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Coyame &#8212; The border&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="crabwise"><b>crabwise</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="crabwised"/><idx:iform value="crabwises"/><idx:iform value="crabwising"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adverb)</i> moving sideways, the way a crab does.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;they circled crabwise&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cravat"><b>cravat</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cravats"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A length of fabric worn knotted or folded around the neck, a precursor of the modern necktie; fashionable men&#8217;s neckwear of the 18th and 19th centuries.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the first cravat, sat mute as a tailor&#8217;s dummy&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="crenellated"><b>crenellated</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="crenellatedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Having battlements; notched or indented along the top edge like the parapet of a castle; here applied metaphorically to the shimmering, jagged distortions of desert heat haze.</p><p class="q">&#8220;anonymous in the crenellated heat&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cressets"><b>cressets</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cresset"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Iron baskets or cups mounted on poles and filled with oil or pitch, burned as torches to provide outdoor illumination.</p><p class="q">&#8220;stood a few poles about mounted with cressets of burning oil&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="criada"><b>criada</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="criadas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> A female domestic servant or maid. From <em>criar</em> (to raise, to rear).</p><p class="q">&#8220;he found an old criada cowering in what must have passed for a kitchen&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="crinoline"><b>crinoline</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="crinolines"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A stiffened petticoat or cage of hooped steel used to puff out a skirt into a wide bell shape; the fashionable mid-Victorian women&#8217;s undergarment. Here worn as a costume on the performing bear.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a bear in a crinoline twirled strangely upon a board stage&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="crosstree"><b>crosstree</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="crosstrees"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A horizontal timber or beam used as a structural support; the term is borrowed from nautical usage (where crosstrees spread a ship&#8217;s shrouds), here applied to a ceiling beam from which a lamp is suspended.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A lone lamp hung from a crosstree in the ceiling&#8230;&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A horizontal crossbar or transverse piece; here the horizontal arm of a cross to which a body is fastened. The nautical sense is a horizontal bar near the top of a mast; here applied by analogy to the crossbar of a crucifixion cross.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The mummied corpse hung from the crosstree&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="croupier"><b>croupier</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="croupiers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A casino or gambling-table attendant who manages bets and moves coins or chips with a practiced sweeping gesture of the hand.</p><p class="q">&#8220;advancing them with the back of his hand forward like a croupier&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="crucifixion"><b>crucifixion thorn</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="thorn"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Any of several spiny desert shrubs bearing the common name, most often Canotia holacantha or Castela emoryi; dense, leafless plants bristling with stiff thorns, common in the Sonoran and Chihuahuan deserts.</p><p class="q">&#8220;among catclaw and crucifixion thorn&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="crypt"><b>crypt</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="crypts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An underground vault, especially one beneath a church used as a burial place; here figuratively the dormant resting place of gods imagined as sleeping.</p><p class="q">&#8220;gods of vengeance and of compassion alike lie sleeping in their crypt&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cuano"><b>Cuano</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cuanos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> McCarthy&#8217;s spelling of <em>guano</em>: the accumulated excrement of bats (or seabirds), rich in nitrogen compounds including potassium nitrate (saltpetre), a key ingredient of gunpowder.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Cuano&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cuartel"><b>cuartel</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cuartels"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> Barracks; military quarters within a garrison or fort (from Spanish <em>cuartel</em>, quarter or lodging for soldiers).</p><p class="q">&#8220;entered the cuartel and got his saddle&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> A military barracks or garrison.</p><p class="q">&#8220;in front of the cuartel where he cut down the Mexican flag&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cuatro"><b>Cuatro de copas</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="copas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Four of cups&#8221;; a card in the Spanish-suited playing deck (<em>baraja espa&#241;ola</em>), equivalent to the Four of Cups in tarot, associated in fortune-telling with introspection and emotional disconnection.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Cuatro de copas, he called out.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cul"><b>cul-de-sac</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(French)</i> Literally &#8220;bottom of a bag&#8221; (<em>cul</em> = bottom, <em>de</em> = of, <em>sac</em> = bag); a dead-end passage with no exit; here a pocket in the bone-strewn terrain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;In a culdesac the tracks of the expriest terminated and came back&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cusps"><b>cusps</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cusp"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Points or pointed projections; here the jagged upward-pointing shards of broken glass embedded in the top of a wall to deter climbing.</p><p class="q">&#8220;pick its way among the cusps of broken glass set upright in the mud masonry&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sign"><b>cut for sign</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> A tracker&#8217;s term: to ride or walk in widening circles or across open ground searching for any trace (&#8220;sign&#8221;) of a quarry&#8217;s passage&#8212;tracks, bent grass, droppings.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They cut for sign until dark&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cuanto"><b>Cu&#225;nto</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cuantos"/><idx:iform value="cuánto"/><idx:iform value="cuántos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;How much?&#8221;; an interrogative used to ask the price.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Cuanto, said Toadvine.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="quieres"><b>Cu&#225;nto quieres?</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cuanto"/><idx:iform value="cuánto"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;How much do you want?&#8221; (<em>cu&#225;nto</em> = how much; <em>quieres</em> = you want).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Cuanto quieres? said the judge&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cylinders"><b>cylinders</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="cylinder"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The rotating chambers of a revolver, each holding one loaded charge. Spare pre-loaded cylinders could be carried and swapped into a revolver for rapid reloading &#8212; a common practice before cartridge revolvers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;men with their revolvers disassembled trying to fit the spare loaded cylinders&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="como"><b>C&#243;mo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="comos"/><idx:iform value="cómo"/><idx:iform value="cómos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;What?&#8221; or &#8220;How?&#8221;; used here as a short expression of incomprehension, equivalent to &#8220;Pardon?&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;C&#243;mo?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="damascus"><b>damascus barrels</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="barrels"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Shotgun barrels made by forge-welding twisted rods of iron and steel around a mandrel, producing a distinctive watered or serpentine pattern in the metal; the premium barrel material for fine 19th-century shotguns.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The shotgun was English made and had damascus barrels&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dauphin"><b>Dauphin</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dauphins"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The title of the heir apparent to the French throne; here alluding to a line in Shakespeare&#8217;s Henry V (Act I, scene 2), where King Henry warns that those not yet born shall have cause to curse the Dauphin&#8217;s scorn. The judge misquotes or adapts it as &#8220;soul.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;some are not yet born who shall have cause to curse the Dauphin&#8217;s soul&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="david"><b>David Brown</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="brown"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> A real member of the Glanton scalp-hunting gang, historically documented as having been jailed in San Diego and later lynched in Los Angeles in 1855; here he is found riding in the Colorado Desert.</p><p class="q">&#8220;came David Brown&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dawnstar"><b>dawnstar</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dawnstars"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The morning star; Venus when visible near the eastern horizon before sunrise.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the dawnstar burned pale in the east&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="viene"><b>De donde viene?</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="donde"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> &#8220;Where do you come from?&#8221; (Informal; standard form would be <em>&#191;De d&#243;nde vienen?</em>)</p><p class="q">&#8220;De donde viene? called the strangers.&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> &#8220;Where do you come from?&#8221; <em>De d&#243;nde</em> = from where; <em>viene</em> = you come (formal, from <em>venir</em>).</p><p class="q">&#8220;De donde viene?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="viene"><b>De d&#243;nde viene?</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="donde"/><idx:iform value="dónde"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Where do you come from?&#8221; (<em>de d&#243;nde</em> = from where; <em>viene</em> = you/he come, formal).</p><p class="q">&#8220;De donde viene?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="deadcart"><b>deadcart</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="deadcarts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A cart used to collect and transport corpses, especially during outbreaks of disease; historically associated with plague and cholera epidemics.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The deadcart &#8212; San Antonio de Bexar&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A cart used to collect and transport the bodies of the dead, especially from a battlefield or plague; historically associated with times of mass death.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the deadcart moving among them like a hearse from limbo&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="deadman"><b>deadman</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="deadmans"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A buried anchor or counterweight, typically a log, plank, or block embedded in the ground, used to secure a mooring line, retaining structure, or, here, a ferry landing.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a landing upstream where there was a deadman built of driftlogs&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="deathcamas"><b>deathcamas</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="deathcama"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Toxic flowering plants (formerly genus <em>Zigadenus</em>) that closely resemble edible camas bulbs but are fatally poisonous to humans and livestock; all parts contain potent steroidal alkaloids.</p><p class="q">&#8220;monkeyflower and deathcamas hanging in a small and perilous garden&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="deathcart"><b>deathcart</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="deathcarts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A cart bearing a carved wooden skeleton figure, used in the Penitentes&#8217; Lenten processions to represent death; also called the <em>carreta de la muerte</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The deathcart&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="debarkees"><b>debarkees</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="debarkee"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Passengers who have just disembarked from a vessel; those who have stepped off a ferry or boat.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the debarkees at the crossing scrabbled up their arms from among the dunnage&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="debouched"><b>debouched</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="debouch"/><idx:iform value="debouche"/><idx:iform value="deboucheded"/><idx:iform value="deboucheding"/><idx:iform value="deboucheds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Emerged from a confined or narrow space into a more open one; a military term for troops filing out of a defile or passage into open ground.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The Americans debouched into the dancing hall&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="decocted"><b>decocted</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="decoct"/><idx:iform value="decocte"/><idx:iform value="decocteded"/><idx:iform value="decocteding"/><idx:iform value="decocteds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Extracted or concentrated by boiling; from <em>decoct</em>, to extract the essence of a substance through heat. Here used figuratively for mercury as a primordial substance distilled from the earth.</p><p class="q">&#8220;decocted from out the secret dark of the earth&#8217;s heart&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="defiled"><b>defiled</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="defil"/><idx:iform value="defile"/><idx:iform value="defileded"/><idx:iform value="defileding"/><idx:iform value="defileds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Marched out in a long file through a narrow passage or restricted terrain; a military term for troops exiting a confined space in column.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Glanton and his riders defiled out of the wooded littoral&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="defiles"><b>defiles</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="defile"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Narrow passes or gorges through which troops or travelers must move in single file; steep-sided ravines cutting through hills.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they rode up through a series of narrow defiles into a rolling hill country&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="norte"><b>del Norte</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> <b>1.</b> The Rio Grande, whose full Spanish name was the R&#237;o Grande del Norte (&#8220;Great River of the North&#8221;). In the 1840s, &#8220;del Norte&#8221; or &#8220;el Norte&#8221; was the standard name for the river along the Texas&#8211;Mexico border.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They crossed the del Norte by night&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> &#8220;Of the North&#8221;; short for R&#237;o del Norte, the Mexican name for the Rio Grande, the river forming the US&#8211;Mexico border.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They crossed the del Norte&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="delaware"><b>Delaware indians</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="indians"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> The Lenape (Delaware) people, originally from the northeastern woodlands; by the mid-19th century many had been displaced westward and became widely employed as scouts, guides, and hunters for U.S. Army expeditions and private outfits across the Southwest and Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Delaware indians&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="delaware"><b>Delaware(s)</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> Members of the Lenape people (also called Delaware Indians), widely employed as guides, trackers, and scouts by Anglo-American expeditions and military companies throughout the mid-19th-century American West.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The Delawares kept callin halts&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="delawares"><b>Delawares</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Members of the Delaware (Lenape) people, an Algonquian-speaking nation originally from the northeastern United States; by the mid-nineteenth century many Delaware men worked as highly skilled scouts and guides for U.S. Army and private expeditions in the Southwest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;In the morning two of the Delawares were gone.&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Members of the Delaware (Lenape) people, an Algonquian nation; by the mid-19th century many Delaware men worked as scouts and trackers for Anglo expeditions in the Southwest, valued for their woodcraft and skills.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Glanton sent the Delawares&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>3.</b> Members of the Lenape (Delaware) people, historically from the mid-Atlantic and Ohio Valley; by the mid-19th century many Delaware men worked as scouts, hunters, and fighters on the western frontier, and several rode with scalp-hunting companies in the borderlands.</p><p class="q">&#8220;At sunrise the Delawares rode into the camp&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>4.</b> The Lenape people, originally from the Delaware River valley, who by the 1840s had been displaced westward and many of whose men worked as scouts, hunters, and guides throughout the frontier. Delaware scouts were prized for their tracking skill and multi-lingual ability, and some served with private expeditions such as Glanton&#8217;s.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The two darker forms were the last of the Delawares&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="demiculverin"><b>demiculverin</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="demiculverins"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A medium cannon of the 16th&#8211;17th centuries, lighter than a full culverin; the name comes from French <em>demi-coulevrine</em>, &#8220;half-culverin.&#8221; By 1849 such a piece would have been a very old, archaic weapon. The text specifies a twelve-pound bore.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a twelvepound demiculverin loaded with musketballs mounted on the revetment&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="demurred"><b>demurred</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="demurr"/><idx:iform value="demurre"/><idx:iform value="demurreded"/><idx:iform value="demurreding"/><idx:iform value="demurreds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Raised an objection or expressed reluctance; held back from agreeing.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The doctor demurred. He claimed to get along well with the Yumas.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="demurrer"><b>demurrer</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="demurrers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An objection or expression of hesitation; in law, a formal plea that even if the opposing facts are true they are insufficient to support a claim. Here used more loosely for a murmured dissent.</p><p class="q">&#8220;from whom he&#8217;d heard some whispered slur or demurrer&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="denizenry"><b>denizenry</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="denizenries"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The inhabitants or regular denizens of a place, collectively; the body of people who frequent or dwell in a particular locale.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They were a hardbit denizenry and they shambled to the bar&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="derringer"><b>derringer</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="derringers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A small single-shot percussion pocket pistol, originally designed by Philadelphia gunsmith Henry Deringer (1786&#8211;1868); high-end models were frequently fitted with silver mountings and rosewood grips.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a silvermounted derringer stocked in rosewood&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dervishes"><b>dervishes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dervishe"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Members of a Muslim Sufi religious order known for a whirling spinning dance performed as a form of active meditation; here evoked as a comparison for a person caught spinning in a whirlwind.</p><p class="q">&#8220;borne aloft like dervishes in those mindless coils&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="devonian"><b>devonian</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="devonianly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Relating to the Devonian Period (approximately 419&#8211;359 million years ago), the &#8220;Age of Fishes,&#8221; when ancient seas teemed with primitive marine creatures.</p><p class="q">&#8220;like the backs of seabeasts in a devonian dawn&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="diffident"><b>diffident</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="diffidently"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> shy and reserved; reluctant to assert oneself or to engage with others.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The passengers are a diffident lot.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="digame"><b>Digame</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="digames"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Tell me&#8221; (imperative of decir + me); used here as a desperate plea: &#8220;tell me what you want.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Digame, gasped the alcalde.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dikes"><b>dikes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dike"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Long embankments or levee-like walls; here referring to the massive ridge-shaped stacks of skulls and bones piled along the plain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;colossal dikes composed of horned skulls&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="diligence"><b>diligence</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="diligences"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A large, heavy stagecoach used for public or commercial transport, especially in France, Spain, and Latin America; so called in English from the French.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a dusty old diligence with six horses in the traces&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="diphtheria"><b>diphtheria</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="diphtherias"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun, medicine)</i> a severe contagious bacterial infection of the throat and airway, often fatal before vaccination.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;he works in a diptheria pesthouse.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dipper"><b>Dipper</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dippers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The Big Dipper (Ursa Major), an asterism of seven bright stars forming a dipper or ladle shape, which rotates around the polestar over the course of the night and is used to locate it.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they rode the Dipper round while Orion rose&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>2.</b> The Big Dipper, the prominent asterism in Ursa Major used as a navigation reference; the angle of its rotation around Polaris (the North Star) was used to estimate time of night.</p><p class="q">&#8220;when the angle of the Dipper had swung about to this inclination&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="discalced"><b>discalced</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="discalcedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Barefoot or wearing only sandals; from Latin discalceatus (dis- &#8220;away&#8221; + calceus &#8220;shoe&#8221;); applied to certain religious orders who went unshod as a sign of poverty and humility, and here used ironically of the headless corpse.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the headless man was sitting like a murdered anchorite discalced in ashes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="disclets"><b>disclets</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="disclet"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Small disc-shaped objects; a nonce diminutive of &#8220;disc,&#8221; used here to describe fallen aspen leaves lying flat on the trail.</p><p class="q">&#8220;fallen leaves lay like golden disclets&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dishclout"><b>dishclout</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dishclouts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Archaic and dialectal term for a dishcloth or dish-rag; a cloth used for washing dishes.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a sour reek like the stink of a rancid dishclout&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dispatch"><b>dispatch box</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A locked box carried on a coach for official papers, letters, or valuables; equivalent to a mail pouch or strong-box.</p><p class="q">&#8220;an old rawhide dispatch box&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="disquisition"><b>disquisition</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="disquisitions"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A formal or systematic discourse on a subject; an extended, detailed examination or discussion.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He&#8217;d given a short disquisition on the history and architecture of the mission&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="djinn"><b>djinn</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="djinns"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A spirit in Islamic and Arabic mythology, created from smokeless fire, capable of great power and shape-shifting; the judge stepping through the fire is compared to one native to that element.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The judge like a great ponderous djinn stepped through the fire&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A supernatural spirit in Arabian and Islamic tradition, created from smokeless fire; associated in folklore with whirlwinds and capable of taking physical form.</p><p class="q">&#8220;lurch onward like some drunken djinn&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="docked"><b>docked</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dock"/><idx:iform value="docke"/><idx:iform value="dockeded"/><idx:iform value="dockeding"/><idx:iform value="dockeds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Cut short or removed; ordinarily used of an animal&#8217;s tail, here applied to the severing of ears.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they had been docked of their ears&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="divinity"><b>Doctor of Divinity</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="doctor"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An advanced or honorary academic degree in Christian theology, awarded by colleges or seminaries; denotes clerical and scholarly prestige.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the cretin had been a respected Doctor of Divinity from Harvard College&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="doggery"><b>doggery</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="doggeries"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A low, rough drinking establishment; a cheap grog-shop or saloon.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a low doggery once a stable&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> American slang (first use c. 1821) for a low-class saloon or disreputable dive bar; synonymous with &#8220;dog hole.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;every cockpit and doggery&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dogtown"><b>dogtown</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dogtowns"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A colony or settlement of prairie dogs; a network of interconnected burrows, often marked by low mounds, occupied by prairie dogs (<em>Cynomys</em> species). Common on the grasslands and desert edges of the American West.</p><p class="q">&#8220;through a dogtown strewn with old broken earthenware&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dolmens"><b>dolmens</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dolmen"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Prehistoric megalithic structures consisting of a large flat stone laid on upright stones, typically used as burial chambers; here applied metaphorically to the massive mud supports framing the bell between the church towers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;old Spanish bells &#8230; hung from a pole between low mud dolmens&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="donde"><b>Donde esta</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Where is it?&#8221; (&#191;D&#243;nde est&#225;?); Glanton is asking the location of the juzgado.</p><p class="q">&#8220;El juzgado. Donde esta?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="doniphan"><b>Doniphan</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="doniphans"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> Colonel Alexander William Doniphan (1808&#8211;1887), Missouri lawyer and officer who commanded the First Missouri Mounted Volunteers during the Mexican&#8211;American War, leading them on a celebrated march through New Mexico and Chihuahua.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Doniphan&#8217;s command pulled east for Saltillo&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dorys"><b>dorys</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dory"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Variant spelling of &#8220;dories&#8221;; small, shallow, flat-bottomed boats with high flaring sides, traditionally used by fishermen. Here applied metaphorically to the hide-covered houses crouching along the beach in a row.</p><p class="q">&#8220;houses were made of hides ranged like curious dorys along the selvage of sea oats&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>
