<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf">
<head><meta charset="utf-8"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="dict.css"/></head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="merestone"><b>merestone</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="merestones"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An archaic term for a stone set to mark the boundary of a property or territory; a boundary marker.</p><p class="q">&#8220;it was a merestone for to mark him out of nothing at all&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="meridian"><b>meridian</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="meridians"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The highest point in the sky reached by a celestial body during its daily arc; noon or the point of culmination.</p><p class="q">&#8220;overtook them at its midnight meridian&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Here used in its archaic sense of midday, noon; the moment when the sun reaches its highest point.</p><p class="q">&#8220;about the meridian of that day&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mescal"><b>mescal</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mescals"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A distilled Mexican spirit made from the fermented, baked heart of agave plants; from Nahuatl <em>mexcalli</em>. Tequila is a variety of mezcal; in the 19th-century context, a rough agave liquor of the northern frontier.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a glass carboy of clear mescal&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> A distilled spirit made from the cooked hearts of agave plants; smokier and more rustic than tequila, produced throughout Mexico and common on the northern frontier.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Mescal?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mescal"><b>Mescal pits</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pits"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun phrase)</i> Large earth ovens dug by Native peoples of the Southwest, lined with heated rocks, used to slow-roast the bulbs of the agave (mescal) plant for days; the pits leave a characteristic burnt depression in the ground.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Mescal pits&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mesilla"><b>Mesilla</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mesillas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A town in the Rio Grande valley of present-day New Mexico (near modern Las Cruces), an important trade and market center in the mid-19th century on the Camino Real route between Chihuahua and Santa Fe.</p><p class="q">&#8220;bound for the markets at Mesilla&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="meteorite"><b>meteorite</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="meteorites"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A fragment of rock or metal from space that has survived passage through the atmosphere and landed on Earth&#8217;s surface; an iron meteorite (as here) is composed largely of iron-nickel alloy and is extremely dense.</p><p class="q">&#8220;for anvil an enormous iron meteorite shaped like a great molar&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="miasma"><b>miasma</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="miasmas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A noxious, oppressive vapor or stench; here the smell of carbolic disinfectant and decay rising from the deadcart.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they went on up the road in a faint miasma of carbolic&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="micrometer"><b>micrometer</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="micrometers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A precision measuring instrument with a calibrated screw, used to measure small distances or thicknesses to thousandths of an inch. Here a simile for the careful methodical adjustments of the vernier sight.</p><p class="q">&#8220;set the sight like a man using a micrometer&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="midden"><b>midden</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="middens"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A refuse heap or dung pile at a campsite; archaeologically, an accumulation of discarded material from habitation.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a ring of midden stones&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A refuse heap or dump, especially one left by prehistoric or historical people, made up of discarded bones, shells, and other debris; here the bone-strewn ground around Carrizo Creek.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He entered a clearing in that senseless midden&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mier"><b>Mier</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="miers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> Town on the Rio Grande in the Mexican state of Tamaulipas, site of the 1842 Battle of Mier, in which a Texian militia force was decisively defeated and captured by the Mexican army.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Mier&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mill"><b>mill</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="milled"/><idx:iform value="milling"/><idx:iform value="mills"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Of a herd: to move in a confused, circular mass without bolting, typically after disturbance; a technical term in buffalo and cattle driving.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the herd beginning to mill&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="millennial"><b>millennial herds</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="herds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> Herds existing or recurring over thousands of years; here describing the vast buffalo populations that had roamed the plains for millennia before their near-extermination in the 1870s.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The millennial herds&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mimefolk"><b>mimefolk</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mimefolks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A coined compound for performers or mimes; itinerant theatrical people who perform pantomime or dramatic spectacle.</p><p class="q">&#8220;as might some painted troupe of mimefolk recruiting themselves&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mintings"><b>mintings</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="minting"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The places or origins of a coin&#8217;s production; coins grouped by which mint struck them.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he drew corks and poured measures round&#8230; sorted by their mintings&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="miquelets"><b>miquelets</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="miquelet"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Firearms fitted with a miquelet lock, a distinctive Spanish flintlock ignition mechanism with an external mainspring, developed in the late 16th century and used widely in Spain, its colonies, and the Mediterranean world through the 19th century.</p><p class="q">&#8220;men armed with old muskets and miquelets&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="caballo"><b>Mire la oreja de mi caballo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mire"/><idx:iform value="oreja"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Look at the ear of my horse.&#8221; <em>Mire</em> = look (formal imperative of <em>mirar</em>); <em>la oreja</em> = the ear; <em>de mi caballo</em> = of my horse.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Mire la oreja de mi caballo.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mire"><b>Mire, mire</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Look, look&#8221; &#8212; imperative of <em>mirar</em>, urging the kid to look at the head in the jar.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Mire, mire, they cried&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mire"><b>Mire, mire!</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Look, look!&#8221; An imperative urging spectators to watch.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Mire, mire! called the man.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="misdoubt"><b>misdoubt</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="misdoubted"/><idx:iform value="misdoubting"/><idx:iform value="misdoubts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> An archaic and dialectal form of &#8220;doubt&#8221; or &#8220;suspect&#8221;; here used in the negative to mean &#8220;I have no doubt whatsoever.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;I dont misdoubt but what you can shoot a rifle&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mochilas"><b>mochilas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Leather coverings fitted over a saddle tree, often with attached pouches or pockets; used in the Southwest for carrying gear on horseback.</p><p class="q">&#8220;our wallets and panniers and our mochilas with the cave dirt&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mogul"><b>mogul</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="moguls"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A powerful or important personage; a magnate. Derived from Mughal (Mongol), referring to the Mughal emperors of India, and extended in English to mean any great or powerful lord.</p><p class="q">&#8220;this old mogul wore a belted wool overcoat&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mollycoddles"><b>mollycoddles</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mollycoddle"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A contemptuous term for weak, pampered, or overly timid men &#8212; those unwilling to act boldly; a compound of &#8220;molly&#8221; (a diminutive of Mary, used for an effeminate man) and &#8220;coddle&#8221; (to pamper).</p><p class="q">&#8220;those mollycoddles in Washington sit on their hindsides&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="moneyer"><b>moneyer</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="moneyers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Originally a licensed mint official who struck coins; a &#8220;false moneyer&#8221; is a counterfeiter who illegally produces unauthorized coinage. In medieval law, false moneying was treated as treason.</p><p class="q">&#8220;this false moneyer with his gravers and burins&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="monkeyflower"><b>monkeyflower</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="monkeyflowers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Wildflowers of genus <em>Mimulus</em> (and related genera), whose blossoms were said to resemble a grinning monkey face; many species grow at seeps and stream banks in arid western terrain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;monkeyflower and deathcamas hanging in a small and perilous garden&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="monocline"><b>monocline</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="monoclines"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A geological fold in which otherwise horizontal or gently dipping strata suddenly steepen in one direction, creating a step-like bend; common on the Colorado Plateau and in the Chihuahuan desert region.</p><p class="q">&#8220;under the wall of a dark monocline where turrets stood like basalt prophets&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="monte"><b>monte</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="montes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> Short for <em>monte bank</em>: a Spanish-Mexican gambling card game played with a 40-card deck against a house banker, widely popular in 19th-century cantinas and saloons along the U.S.&#8211;Mexico border.</p><p class="q">&#8220;There are monte games at tables by the wall&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A Spanish gambling card game popular throughout Mexico and the American Southwest in the nineteenth century; the banker lays out cards face-up and players bet on which layout will match the suit of a turned &#8220;gate&#8221; card.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Play monte in the dark&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="morningcoats"><b>morningcoats</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="morningcoat"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Formal tailcoats with the front cut away in a curved line to tails at the back; the standard formal daywear for men in the 19th century.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the Delawares strangely austere and menacing in their morningcoats&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="morral"><b>morral</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="morrals"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> A fiber or woven bag; literally a &#8220;grain bag&#8221; or &#8220;nose bag&#8221; originally used to feed horses, but broadly any carrying bag hung from a saddle horn.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a fibre morral filled with coins&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mortices"><b>mortices</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mortice"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Variant spelling of &#8220;mortises&#8221; &#8212; the sockets or slots cut into a wheel hub to receive the tenon ends of the spokes. When the wood shrinks from heat and dryness the spokes loosen in their mortices, causing the wheel to wobble.</p><p class="q">&#8220;drive false spokes into the mortices&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mountain"><b>mountain howitzer</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="howitzer"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A lightweight bronze cannon (specifically the U.S. Army M1841 12-pounder) designed to be broken down and carried by pack animals over mountain terrain; its short barrel gave it a high trajectory suited for plunging fire.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a mountain howitzer&#8212;a bronze twelvepounder with a bore the size of a saucer&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mountebanks"><b>mountebanks</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mountebank"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Itinerant charlatans who sold quack remedies from a raised platform, using entertainment to draw crowds; by extension, any performers or traveling showmen.</p><p class="q">&#8220;an air that was old among the mountebanks of Spain two hundred years before&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="cuadra"><b>Mozos de cuadra</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mozos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Stable boys&#8221; or &#8220;stable hands.&#8221; <em>Mozo</em> = servant/boy; <em>cuadra</em> = stable.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Mozos de cuadra, he called. Venga. Pronto.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mucho"><b>Mucho gusto</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gusto"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Much pleasure&#8221; &#8212; a standard Spanish greeting meaning &#8220;Pleased to meet you.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Mucho gusto.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mygale"><b>mygale</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mygales"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The 19th-century genus name for large, hairy, burrowing spiders now classified as mygalomorphs or theraphosids (tarantulas); the word retains its archaic taxonomic flavor in McCarthy&#8217;s usage to mean a large ground-burrowing spider.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the vicious mygale spiders&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="nacogdoches"><b>Nacogdoches</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> <b>1.</b> one of the oldest towns in Texas, in the far east of the state near the Louisiana line; the name comes from the Nacogdoche, a Caddo people.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Nacogdoches&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> <b>2.</b> A historic town in deep East Texas, one of the oldest continuously inhabited municipalities in the state; a common point of departure for Anglo settlers heading west or south toward San Antonio and the Rio Grande.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Naca, Naca&#8230; Nacogdoches?&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> <b>3.</b> A city in deep East Texas, considered the oldest town in Texas, founded as a Spanish settlement in 1779; here referenced as a place where the kid claims to have encountered the judge before.</p><p class="q">&#8220;I seen him before&#8230;In Nacogdoches&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="nacori"><b>Nacori</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="nacoris"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> N&#225;cori Chico, a town in the sierra region of the state of Sonora, Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Nacori &#8212; The cantina&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="nacozari"><b>Nacozari</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="nacozaris"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> Nacozari de Garc&#237;a, a town and mining district in northeastern Sonora, Mexico, roughly 75 miles south of the Arizona border; the river reference likely denotes the local drainage in that district.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they massacred a pueblo on the Nacozari River&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="nacre"><b>nacre</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="nacres"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Mother-of-pearl; the iridescent substance lining the shells of certain mollusks, with a soft, milky sheen of pale blues and silvers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a mock moon with its own cold gray and nacre seas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="todo"><b>Nada &#8230; Todo va bien</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bien"/><idx:iform value="nada"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Nothing &#8230; Everything is fine.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Nada, said Speyer. Todo va bien.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="wheel"><b>near wheel ox</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="near"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The ox on the left (near) side of the wheel pair, i.e., the rearmost pair of oxen closest to the wagon; the boy rides it to guide the team.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a boy riding the near wheel ox&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="niggard"><b>niggard</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="niggardly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Meagre, scanty, grudgingly small; here describing sparse, insufficient shade.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the niggard acacia shade&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="nighthawks"><b>nighthawks</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="nighthawk"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Crepuscular birds of the genus Chordeiles, related to whip-poor-wills, known for erratic flight at dusk and dawn in open country.</p><p class="q">&#8220;little desert nighthawks like fugitives from some great fire&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="nightlong"><b>nightlong</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="nightlongly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Lasting or continuing throughout the entire night; an archaic compound rarely used in modern prose.</p><p class="q">&#8220;In the nightlong parley they&#8217;d come to terms&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="nihil"><b>Nihil dicit</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dicit"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Latin)</i> &#8220;He says nothing.&#8221; A legal term for a defendant&#8217;s complete failure to answer or plead, resulting in a default judgment; here the judge deploys it as a formal pronouncement of Tobin&#8217;s silence.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Nihil dicit.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="nito"><b>Nito</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="nitos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish, name)</i> a familiar pet-name or nickname (the ending <em>-ito</em> means &#8220;little&#8221;); here she is calling to someone.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Nito, she called.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="nitre"><b>nitre</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="nitres"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Potassium nitrate (also called saltpetre), a white crystalline salt that forms naturally in cave soils enriched by bat guano; the essential oxidizing ingredient in black gunpowder.</p><p class="q">&#8220;it was the nitre&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sucio"><b>No est&#225; sucio</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="esta"/><idx:iform value="está"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;It is not dirty.&#8221; The barman protests that the floor does not need sweeping.</p><p class="q">&#8220;No esta sucio, said the barman.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="whiskey"><b>No hay whiskey</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;There is no whiskey.&#8221; <em>No hay</em> = there is/are no (from <em>haber</em>, to have/be); <em>whiskey</em> = whiskey.</p><p class="q">&#8220;No hay Whiskey, he said.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="escucharme"><b>No puedes escucharme</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="puedes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;You cannot hear me?&#8221; or &#8220;Can&#8217;t you hear me?&#8221; (<em>No</em> = no/not; <em>puedes</em> = you can; <em>escucharme</em> = hear me / listen to me).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Abuelita, he said. No puedes escucharme?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="companeros"><b>No tiene companeros?</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tiene"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Don&#8217;t you have companions?&#8221; (compa&#241;eros = companions, friends; written here without the tilde as in McCarthy&#8217;s text.)</p><p class="q">&#8220;No tiene companeros?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="account"><b>no-account</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun, dialectal)</i> a worthless, good-for-nothing person.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;how did you come to have the goods on that no-account?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="noctambulants"><b>noctambulants</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="noctambulant"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Sleepwalkers; persons who walk or act while asleep. From Latin <em>nox</em> (night) + <em>ambulare</em> (to walk). A rare, archaic term for somnambulist.</p><p class="q">&#8220;like those of noctambulants surprised by day&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="nopal"><b>nopal</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="nopals"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> Prickly-pear cactus (<em>Opuntia</em> spp.), from Nahuatl <em>nohpalli</em>; a flat-padded cactus abundant across the Mexican plateau.</p><p class="q">&#8220;through cholla and nopal, a dwarf forest of spined things&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun / Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> Prickly pear cactus (Opuntia); a common spiny cactus throughout Mexico whose flat pads and fruit are both edible.</p><p class="q">&#8220;through the rocks and nopal and diminished among the shadows&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> The prickly pear cactus (<em>Opuntia</em> spp.), native to the Americas; its flat green pads are eaten and its fruit (<em>tuna</em>) produces hard seeds.</p><p class="q">&#8220;his rifle loaded with the small hard seeds of the nopal fruit&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="norther"><b>norther</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="northers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A sudden, violent cold-front wind sweeping southward out of the north across the Texas plains and into Mexico, capable of dropping the temperature by 20&#8211;40 degrees in minutes; also called a &#8220;blue norther.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;A norther&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="novitiate"><b>novitiate</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="novitiates"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A person undergoing the probationary period before taking full vows in a religious order; one who has not yet become a fully professed member of the order.</p><p class="q">&#8220;I was never a priest but only a novitiate to the order&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="nueces"><b>Nueces</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> The Nueces River, flowing southeast across Texas to the Gulf of Mexico. In the 1840s it was the disputed southern boundary of Texas claimed by Mexico; the strip between it and the Rio Grande was contested territory.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they crossed the Nueces&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ocelot"><b>ocelot</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ocelots"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A medium-sized wild cat (*Leopardus pardalis*) native to the Americas, with a tawny coat patterned in black spots and streaks; its spotted hide was valued for sewing and ornament.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a quiver made from ocelot skin&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ocotillo"><b>ocotillo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ocotillos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A spiny desert shrub (<em>Fouquieria splendens</em>) of the Chihuahuan and Sonoran deserts, with long whip-like canes bearing clusters of scarlet flowers in season; used for fencing when cut and planted, as the live stems take root.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a bare dirt yard fenced with ocotillo&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A tall, thorny desert shrub (Fouquieria splendens) of the Chihuahuan and Sonoran Deserts, leafless most of the year with clusters of red flowers at the tips of its whiplike stems.</p><p class="q">&#8220;grown with ocotillo and sotol&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> *Fouquieria splendens*, a tall spindly desert shrub with multiple whip-like thorned stems and clusters of red-orange flowers at the tips; leafless most of the year, leafing out briefly after rain; a distinctive Sonoran Desert plant.</p><p class="q">&#8220;sporadic ocotillo and stands of grama&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>4.</b> <em>Fouquieria splendens</em>: a tall desert shrub of the Sonoran and Chihuahuan deserts with long spiny cane-stems and scarlet flowers; the dry, resinous stems burn readily and were used as torches.</p><p class="q">&#8220;flowering ocotillo that burned in the final light like horned candelabra&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ogdoad"><b>ogdoad</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ogdoads"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A group of eight; from Greek &#8220;eightfold.&#8221; In Egyptian cosmology the Ogdoad were eight primordial deities of creation; in Gnostic theology the ogdoad denotes the eighth and highest heavenly sphere above the seven planetary realms.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The ogdoad&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="oilcloth"><b>oilcloth slicker</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="slicker"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> a long waterproof raincoat made of cloth treated with oil.</p><p class="q">&#8220;An enormous man dressed in an oilcloth slicker had entered the tent&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ephraim"><b>Old Ephraim</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> A traditional frontier nickname for the grizzly bear, used by American mountain men and hunters of the 18th and 19th centuries.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Old Ephraim&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="recognizance"><b>on his own recognizance</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> Released from custody on a written promise to appear in court, without having to post bail money.</p><p class="q">&#8220;On his own recognizance&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="orchestration"><b>orchestration</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="orchestrations"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The deliberate arrangement and coordination of elements toward a planned outcome; borrowed from musical usage (scoring a piece for an orchestra) and applied to the judge&#8217;s notion that events are arranged by an unseen conductor.</p><p class="q">&#8220;This is an orchestration for an event&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ordnance"><b>ordnance box</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A military-issue crate for storing and transporting weapons, ammunition, or equipment; stamped (stenciled) with official markings identifying its contents and origin.</p><p class="q">&#8220;stenciled ordnance box from the Baton Rouge arsenal&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="orecarts"><b>orecarts</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="orecart"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Small wheeled vehicles used underground or at mine sites to haul ore from the diggings to the surface or processing area.</p><p class="q">&#8220;weathered wagons and orecarts bonewhite in the dawn&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="oremills"><b>oremills</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="oremill"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Ore mills &#8212; facilities (often stamp mills) for crushing and processing rock to extract metal; here carved into the riverbed stones.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Small oremills had been ground into the polished rocks in the river&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="orion"><b>Orion</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="orions"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> A prominent constellation representing a mythological hunter, recognizable by three stars in a row forming his belt; it rises in the east and is visible from both hemispheres.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Orion rose in the southwest like a great electric kite&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="osnaburg"><b>osnaburg</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="osnaburgs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A coarse, plain-weave linen or cotton fabric originally from Osnabr&#252;ck, Germany; used widely on the frontier as cheap, durable covering for wagon frames and as rough clothing.</p><p class="q">&#8220;wagons with their osnaburg covers&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ossature"><b>ossature</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ossatures"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The skeletal framework or arrangement of bones; the bone structure of a body or creature.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the ossature of small apes at their place of murder&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ossified"><b>ossified</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ossifiedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Turned to bone or to a bone-like stony substance; petrified.</p><p class="q">&#8220;like the ossified eggs of some primal groundbird&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ossuary"><b>ossuary</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ossuaries"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A container, vault, or chamber used to store the skeletal remains of the dead; a charnel house.</p><p class="q">&#8220;like some more ancient ossuary&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="outfit"><b>outfit</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="outfits"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Frontier term for a person&#8217;s complete gear, equipment, and supplies.</p><p class="q">&#8220;I had my outfit stole&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="overture"><b>overture</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="overtures"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An orchestral introduction to an opera or theatrical performance; here the judge uses it to mean the opening phase of the evening&#8217;s events (the shooting of the bear).</p><p class="q">&#8220;The overture carries certain marks of decisiveness&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="packanimal"><b>packanimal</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="packanimals"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A beast of burden used to carry loads on a pack saddle, such as a mule or burro.</p><p class="q">&#8220;cut the throats of the packanimals&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="packsaddles"><b>packsaddles</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="packsaddle"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Saddles designed for pack animals to carry loads rather than riders, with frames and attachment points for bags, panniers, and cargo.</p><p class="q">&#8220;panniers and packsaddles and the bones of men&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="paling"><b>paling</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="palings"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A pointed wooden stake; one of the vertical posts forming a palisade or spike fence.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The doctor&#8217;s head had been mounted upon a paling&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="palings"><b>palings</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="paling"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Fence stakes or pickets &#8212; pointed wooden (here, bone) stakes driven into the ground and lashed together to form a fence. A &#8220;paling fence&#8221; is a picket fence.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Bone palings ruled the small and dusty purlieus&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pallet"><b>pallet</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pallets"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A makeshift bed or sleeping mat, typically a straw-stuffed pad or a few blankets laid directly on the ground or floor, with no bed frame.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the Borginnis took the idiot to his pallet under a wagon-sheet&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> In horology, the pallet fork: the component that engages the teeth of the escape wheel to regulate the escapement&#8217;s intermittent release of motion.</p><p class="q">&#8220;movements are monitored with escapement and pallet&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="palmilla"><b>palmilla</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="palmillas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A Spanish common name for soaptree yucca (<em>Yucca elata</em>) or related species; a slender-trunked, grass-leaved desert yucca native to the Chihuahuan Desert and adjacent regions.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a broad plain of desert grass dotted with palmilla&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A desert plant of the Sonoran borderlands, most often *Nolina microcarpa* (sacahuista or beargrass) or a small yucca species; a rosette-forming plant with long stiff leaves rising from a short trunk, standing alone on the desert flat.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the widely scattered palmilla standing solitary and silent&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="paloverde"><b>paloverde</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="paloverdes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> From Spanish palo verde (&#8220;green stick&#8221;): a desert tree (Parkinsonia spp.) of the Sonoran and Chihuahuan Deserts with green photosynthetic bark and small yellow flowers; its branches were used as fuel and for improvised poles.</p><p class="q">&#8220;skewered on a paloverde pole over the raked coals&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> A small desert tree (<em>Parkinsonia</em> species) native to the Sonoran Desert. The name is Spanish for &#8220;green stick&#8221; or &#8220;green wood&#8221; (<em>palo</em> = wood/stick, <em>verde</em> = green), referring to the tree&#8217;s distinctive green bark, which photosynthesizes in drought when the tree has shed its leaves. Arizona&#8217;s state tree.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a fireblacked paloverde tree&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="palsied"><b>palsied</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="palsiedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Afflicted with palsy; trembling uncontrollably or partly paralyzed, unable to control the muscles.</p><p class="q">&#8220;blowing into his clawed and palsied hands&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pampooties"><b>pampooties</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pampootie"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Rawhide shoes of a single piece of untanned hide folded and strapped around the foot, traditionally made on the Aran Islands of Ireland.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a rough and curious pair of pampooties cut from a piece of hide&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="panama"><b>panama hat</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A lightweight, brimmed hat woven from the plaited leaves of the toquilla palm plant, traditionally made in Ecuador; widely used in tropical and subtropical climates.</p><p class="q">&#8220;in his hand he held a panama hat&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pandemonium"><b>pandemonium</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pandemoniums"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Wild, chaotic uproar and confusion; originally coined by John Milton in Paradise Lost as the name of the capital of Hell (&#8220;all demons&#8221;).</p><p class="q">&#8220;the distant pandemonium of the sun&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="panicgrass"><b>panicgrass</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="panicgras"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Any grass of the large genus <em>Panicum</em>, common in warm regions; a sparse, wiry range grass typical of dry Southwestern terrain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;saltbush and panicgrass&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="panniers"><b>panniers</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pannier"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Paired baskets or bags carried one on each side of a pack animal to balance the load; the standard load-carrying equipment for a mule train. From Latin <em>p&#257;n&#257;rium</em>, &#8220;bread basket.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;they saw panniers and packsaddles&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Large baskets or bags slung in pairs across a pack animal&#8217;s back for carrying goods; from Old French <em>panier</em> (bread basket).</p><p class="q">&#8220;goods were piled up in tattered panniers lashed to the backs of three burros&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> Large baskets or bags hung in pairs across a pack animal&#8217;s back to carry supplies and equipment; standard packhorse gear.</p><p class="q">&#8220;emptied out the panniers&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>4.</b> Paired bags or baskets slung across the back of a pack animal, one on each side of the load saddle, used to carry supplies and equipment on the trail.</p><p class="q">&#8220;we filled our wallets and panniers&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>5.</b> Large baskets or bags hung in pairs across a pack animal&#8217;s back to carry supplies; from French <em>panier</em>, &#8220;basket.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;with the contents of the panniers exploding soundlessly&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pantheon"><b>pantheon</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pantheons"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The complete body of gods of a people or religion; used figuratively here for the entire roster of a nation&#8217;s celebrated heroes.</p><p class="q">&#8220;ignorant&#8230; of any name at all from the pantheon of their sister republic&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="papago"><b>Papago</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="papagos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> The name formerly used by Spanish colonizers and Americans for the Tohono O&#8217;odham (&#8220;Desert People&#8221;), the indigenous people whose territory surrounds San Xavier del Bac and the Tucson basin. The name derives from a neighboring group&#8217;s word for them, roughly &#8220;bean eaters,&#8221; rendered phonetically in Spanish.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The clusters of Papago huts seemed without tenant&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="patch"><b>paper patch</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="paper"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A precise wrapping of paper around a slightly undersized bullet before loading into a muzzle-loading rifle. The paper centers the bullet in the bore and engages the rifling on firing, dramatically improving accuracy.</p><p class="q">&#8220;used a false muzzle and paper patch&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="paps"><b>paps</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pap"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Breasts or nipples; an archaic or dialectal word.</p><p class="q">&#8220;her paps like wrinkled aubergines hanging from under the shawl&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="parallax"><b>parallax</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="parallaxes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The apparent shift in position of an object when seen from two different vantage points; extended here to the idea that events in the past look different depending on where the observer stands, producing false or misleading guidance.</p><p class="q">&#8220;On parallax and false guidance in things past&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="parapet"><b>parapet</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="parapets"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A low protective wall along the top of a roof, bridge, or fortification; here, the crumbling mud-brick wall at the top of the old church.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He was up yonder [the] crumbling mud parapet&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A low protective wall along the edge of a fortification, roof, or elevated platform, behind which defenders can take cover.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The doctor stood on the low parapet of the works&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="parapeted"><b>parapeted</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="parapetedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Equipped with a parapet: a low protective wall built along the top of a fortified wall or roof, shielding defenders.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The houses were loopholed and parapeted&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="paraselene"><b>paraselene</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="paraselenes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An atmospheric optical phenomenon in which a bright spot appears to one or both sides of the moon, caused by moonlight refracting through hexagonal ice crystals in high cirrus clouds; also called a mock moon or moon dog.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The paraselene&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="parched"><b>parched corn</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="corn"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Dried or roasted corn kernels, a traditional lightweight trail ration that could be eaten without cooking.</p><p class="q">&#8220;ate a handful of parched corn for his supper&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="paredes"><b>Paredes</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> Mariano Paredes y Arrillaga (1797&#8211;1849), a Mexican general and former president of Mexico (1845&#8211;1846) whose aggressive posturing helped precipitate the Mexican-American War; associated with pronunciamentos and factional instability in postwar Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Paredes is already calling for secession from the Mexican government&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="parfleche"><b>parfleche</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="parfleches"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A Plains Indian article made from stiff rawhide, prepared by drying stretched hide in the sun; used as soles, containers, and straps. The word comes from French <em>parer la fl&#232;che</em> (to deflect an arrow).</p><p class="q">&#8220;parfleche soles&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="parkland"><b>parkland</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="parklands"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Open terrain of grass and scattered trees resembling a park; used in ecology for savanna-like landscapes with space between the trees.</p><p class="q">&#8220;this high parkland deer leapt and scattered&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="parley"><b>parley</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="parleys"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A conference or negotiation between opposing parties, especially under a truce; here, further discussion or concession in the standoff.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the judge and Glanton &#8230; offered nothing further in the way of parley&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A conference or discussion between opposing sides to reach an agreement; from French <em>parler</em> (to speak). The word carries a formal, slightly archaic flavor, typically denoting talks between enemies or adversaries.</p><p class="q">&#8220;In the nightlong parley they&#8217;d come to terms with the Yumas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="paroquets"><b>paroquets</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="paroquet"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Parakeets &#8212; small, long-tailed parrots; an archaic variant spelling. Various species are native to tropical Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;green gorges thick with vines where paroquets and gaudy macaws leered&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="parricide"><b>parricide</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="parricides"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> a person who murders a parent or other near relative.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He sees a parricide hanged in a crossroads hamlet&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="particolored"><b>particolored</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="particoloredly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Displaying two or more colors in distinct patches or sections; variegated, multicolored. A formal or literary synonym for &#8220;multi-hued.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;regions of particolored stone&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="partisans"><b>partisans</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="partisan"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Members of an armed irregular company or fighting band; here the Glanton gang as a body of armed men.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the partisans rode out each man armed with a pair of the pistols&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pasajeros"><b>Pasajeros de un pa&#237;s antiguo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="antiguo"/><idx:iform value="pais"/><idx:iform value="país"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Passengers of an ancient country.&#8221; Travelers or wayfarers belonging to a land of great age.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Pasajeros de un pa&#237;s antiguo&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pascual"><b>Pascual</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pascuals"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> A Quechan (Yuma) leader at the Colorado River crossing during the 1849&#8211;1850 period; he was later recognized as tribal chief by U.S. Army officers at Fort Yuma after its establishment.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a lesser chieftain named Pascual in a frogged coat&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pase"><b>Pase pase pase</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Come in, come in, come in&#8221;; a showman&#8217;s call inviting the crowd to enter or gather round.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the woman shrieked Pase pase pase&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="paseos"><b>paseos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Evening promenades; the social custom of strolling through public streets or plazas in the early evening, typical of Mexican and Spanish towns.</p><p class="q">&#8220;there were no paseos and the young girls of the city were boarded up&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="patent"><b>patent</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="patently"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Open, plainly visible, unconcealed; from Latin <em>patens</em> (lying open). Here: the figures are openly declared, as if woven in plain sight, like a letters patent &#8212; a public, unsealed document.</p><p class="q">&#8220;it bore like a patent woven into the fabric the figures of stars and quartermoons&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="patent"><b>patent breech</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="breech"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A proprietary breech design for muzzle-loading guns, incorporating a separate powder chamber and ignition channel to improve ignition speed; used on fine English sporting arms.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he hooked the barrels into the patent breech&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="patrimony"><b>patrimony</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="patrimonies"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An inheritance from one&#8217;s father or ancestors; property or rights passed down through the paternal line.</p><p class="q">&#8220;euchered the son out of his patrimony&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="valéry"><b>Paul Val&#233;ry</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="paul"/><idx:iform value="valery"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun / person)</i> French poet, essayist, and thinker (1871&#8211;1945), admired for densely intellectual verse and wide-ranging critical essays. The lines are taken from his early dialogue on East and West usually titled in English &#8220;The Yalu&#8221; (1895).</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;paul valery&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pauldrons"><b>pauldrons</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pauldron"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Plate armor pieces covering the shoulder joints, typically large dome-shaped or laminated guards extending over the upper arm and chest. A component of full European plate armor from the 15th century onward.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the breastplate and pauldrons deeply dented&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pedlar"><b>pedlar</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pedlars"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A traveling trader who sells goods from place to place, carrying wares on foot or by pack; variant spelling of &#8220;peddler.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;pedlar and gambler and drifter&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="peignoirs"><b>peignoirs</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="peignoir"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Women&#8217;s long, loose negligees or dressing gowns, often sheer; from French peigner, &#8220;to comb (hair).&#8221; Here worn by the whores as working attire.</p><p class="q">&#8220;In their stained peignoirs&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pelados"><b>pelados</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Literally &#8220;peeled ones&#8221;; Mexican slang for destitute people, penniless urban poor or vagrants; from <em>pelado</em> (bald, stripped bare).</p><p class="q">&#8220;a few old pelados sat mute in the doorways&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="peloncillo"><b>peloncillo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="peloncillos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Unrefined dark brown sugar pressed into a cone or piloncillo shape; made from evaporated cane juice, coarser and more molasses-rich than refined sugar.</p><p class="q">&#8220;little chunks of raw brown peloncillo sugar&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="peltries"><b>peltries</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="peltrie"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Animal pelts or furs, especially as trade goods; hides taken from hunted animals. Here the gang carries baled scalps styled ironically as peltries.</p><p class="q">&#8220;their baled peltries&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="penitent"><b>penitent brothers</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="brothers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Los Hermanos Penitentes, a lay Catholic confraternity of Hispanic men in northern New Mexico and southern Colorado, known for austere Lenten self-flagellation processions and Passion reenactments.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The penitent brothers&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="peons"><b>peons</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="peon"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> In the Mexican context, laborers bound to an estate by debt peonage &#8212; a system in which a small advance of money created a debt obligation, with interest manipulated so the debt could never be repaid, binding the worker in perpetual servitude.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they looked like God&#8217;s profoundest peons&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> In 19th-century Mexico, landless agricultural laborers, often bound to an estate by debt peonage; lower-class rural workers with severely restricted freedom of movement.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The peons in the fields saw them&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="perdida"><b>Perdida</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="perdidas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Lost&#8221; (feminine singular); here repeated as a lament that the card &#8212; and by extension the fortune &#8212; has been lost in the night.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Perdida, perdida. La carta esta perdida en la noche.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>
