<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf">
<head><meta charset="utf-8"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="dict.css"/></head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dosshouse"><b>dosshouse</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dosshouses"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> British English for the very cheapest class of lodging house, used by the homeless or destitute; the American equivalent is a &#8220;flophouse.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;a hostel that was no more than a common dosshouse&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mountain"><b>Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="brazos"/><idx:iform value="double"/><idx:iform value="fork"/><idx:iform value="river"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A roughly 170-mile tributary of the Brazos River, flowing across the Rolling Plains of northwest Texas; it takes its name from the Double Mountains landmark in Stonewall County.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He crossed the Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="doubletime"><b>doubletime</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="doubletimed"/><idx:iform value="doubletimes"/><idx:iform value="doubletiming"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun/adverb)</i> Twice the normal speed or tempo; in music and marching, moving at twice the standard beat.</p><p class="q">&#8220;now in doubletime and bowing to the ladies&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="doubloons"><b>doubloons</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="doubloon"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Gold coins of the Spanish Empire, each worth two <em>escudos</em>; the standard large gold currency of Spain and its American colonies.</p><p class="q">&#8220;clack their gold doubloons on the board&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Spanish gold coins worth two escudos each, widely circulated throughout the Americas; minted in Spain and various colonial mints from the 16th century until 1849.</p><p class="q">&#8220;There were doubloons minted in Spain and in Guadalajara&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pistols"><b>dragoon pistols</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dragoon"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Colt Dragoon revolvers, produced 1848&#8211;1860: heavy .44-caliber six-shot percussion revolvers developed for U.S. Army mounted Dragoon regiments. They were the standard cavalry sidearm of the Mexican-American War era.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The captain carried a pair of dragoon pistols&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dragooned"><b>dragooned</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dragoon"/><idx:iform value="dragoone"/><idx:iform value="dragooneded"/><idx:iform value="dragooneding"/><idx:iform value="dragooneds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Coerced or forced by violent or threatening means; originally from dragoons (mounted soldiers) used to terrorize civilian populations into submission.</p><p class="q">&#8220;this somnolent pueblo was forthwith dragooned into a weltering shambles&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dragoons"><b>dragoons</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dragoon"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Mounted infantry soldiers who rode to battle but also fought on foot &#8212; later used for any heavy cavalry. In the U.S. Army of the 1840s&#8211;50s, the Dragoon regiments were the main cavalry force on the frontier.</p><p class="q">&#8220;coats of slain dragoons&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Mounted soldiers trained to fight both on horseback and on foot; in the U.S. Army of the 1840s, the heavy cavalry arm, for whom large-caliber horse pistols like the Colt Dragoon were designed.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a huge sidearm meant for dragoons&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> Mounted infantry soldiers originally trained to fight either on horseback or on foot; by the mid-19th century used more broadly for any cavalry troopers. Here applied loosely to Glanton&#8217;s mounted party.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the ragged dragoons riding up out of the willows&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dramhouse"><b>dramhouse</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dramhouses"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A variant of &#8220;dramshop&#8221;: a bar or tavern where spirits are sold by the dram (a small unit of liquid measure); a low drinking establishment.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he was in every dramhouse and gamingroom&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dramshop"><b>dramshop</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dramshops"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> a bar or tavern that sells spirits by the drink (a &#8220;dram&#8221;); McCarthy also calls it a &#8220;dramhouse.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;A man came from the dramshop door&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="draw"><b>draw</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="draws"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A small, shallow ravine or gully; a channel worn by water runoff.</p><p class="q">&#8220;dawn finds him in a grassy draw where he&#8217;d gone to hide from the wind&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A minor valley or shallow ravine that drains downslope, essentially a small and often dry watercourse; a common terrain feature in the arid American Southwest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The site lay up a draw&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> A small, shallow, dry valley or gully that drains surface water; in the Southwest, a natural drainage channel that flows only during or after rain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a fan washed out of the draw above them&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="drifts"><b>drifts</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="drift"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Horizontal tunnels driven into a hillside along a mineral vein; a standard term in hardrock mining.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the hills above the town were everywhere tunneled and scaffolded and scarred with drifts and tailings&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="drovers"><b>drovers</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="drover"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> People who drive herds of cattle or sheep over long distances to market.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Cattle drovers &#8212; Their kindness&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> People who drive livestock &#8212; cattle, horses, or sheep &#8212; overland in large herds, typically to market or to new pastures.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a company of drovers reported them investing the town of Coyame&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="drum"><b>drum</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="drums"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> On a percussion-cap, multi-barrel firearm (such as a double-barrelled rifle with rotating barrels): the nipple seat or priming receptacle on each barrel where a percussion cap is placed to fire the charge.</p><p class="q">&#8220;capped one drum and rotated the barrels and capped the other&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="disbursement"><b>drumhead disbursement</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="drumhead"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> A hasty, improvised, on-the-spot distribution of pay with no formal ceremony; from &#8220;drumhead,&#8221; meaning a summary proceeding conducted in the field (originally using a drum as a makeshift table).</p><p class="q">&#8220;in a brisk drumhead disbursement divided out the pile of gold&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dry"><b>dry pan</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A flat, dried-out basin or salt flat, the bed of an evaporated lake or seasonal pond; a playa.</p><p class="q">&#8220;crossing a dry pan at a walk&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="drygulch"><b>drygulch</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="drygulchly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Used here attributively from the verb to dry-gulch: to ambush and kill someone in a remote ravine; a &#8220;drygulch phantom&#8221; is one that lurks and ambushes from the dark.</p><p class="q">&#8220;as if to fend away some drygulch phantom out there in the dark&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="duff"><b>duff</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="duffs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The layer of decomposed organic matter&#8212;rotted leaves, needles, and debris&#8212;covering a forest floor.</p><p class="q">&#8220;dragmarks through the duff of a high forest floor&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="duledge"><b>duledge pegs</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pegs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Small wooden dowel pegs used to join the abutting ends of the felloes (rim segments) of a wheel, keeping them aligned; a term from wheelwright trade. When the wheel shrinks and loosens, these pegs work free and drop out.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The duledge pegs worked loose and dropped behind&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dunnage"><b>dunnage</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dunnages"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Personal baggage, gear, or belongings; originally a nautical term for packing material used to protect cargo in a ship&#8217;s hold; extended in general use to mean any baggage or personal kit.</p><p class="q">&#8220;people had shouldered up their dunnage and stood waiting&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Loose baggage, personal goods, or packing material; also used for miscellaneous cargo or gear stowed around heavier freight.</p><p class="q">&#8220;scrabbled up their arms from among the dunnage&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="durance"><b>durance vile</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="vile"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> An archaic or literary phrase meaning harsh, prolonged imprisonment; &#8220;durance&#8221; is an old word for captivity or confinement.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Brown in durance vile&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="durango"><b>Durango</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="durangos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A city and state in north-central Mexico, south of Chihuahua; a trading center of the region during the mid-nineteenth century.</p><p class="q">&#8220;tried to sell the scalps in Durango&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="devils"><b>dust-devils</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dust"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Small, rotating columns of dust and debris lifted by a whirlwind in desert terrain; a common phenomenon of arid plains.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Dust-devils stood on the horizon&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dustspouts"><b>dustspouts</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dustspout"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Large rotating columns of dust and air rising from a desert surface; dust devils or dust whirlwinds.</p><p class="q">&#8220;dustspouts rose wobbling and augered the earth&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dutchland"><b>dutchland</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dutchlands"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> Informal, archaic English rendering of Germany or the Low Countries (&#8220;Dutch&#8221; in older American usage could refer to German-speakers generally, from <em>Deutsch</em>).</p><p class="q">&#8220;as if we were all of us in dutchland&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="digame"><b>D&#237;game</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="digames"/><idx:iform value="dígame"/><idx:iform value="dígames"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> Literally &#8220;tell me&#8221; (formal imperative of decir + me); used here as the barman&#8217;s prompt, equivalent to &#8220;What&#8217;ll it be?&#8221; or &#8220;Speak.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;The barman nodded to him. Digame, he said.&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> Literally &#8220;tell me&#8221; (imperative of decir, &#8220;to say,&#8221; with the indirect-object pronoun me); used as a prompt meaning &#8220;what can I do for you?&#8221; or &#8220;yes, what is it?&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;D&#237;game, he said.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="eartrumpet"><b>eartrumpet</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="eartrumpets"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A primitive hearing aid &#8212; a funnel-shaped horn held to the ear to collect and amplify sound; early versions were fashioned from actual animal horns.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he leaned with a goathorn eartrumpet to the rising din within&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ecliptic"><b>ecliptic</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ecliptics"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The apparent path traced by the Sun across the celestial sphere over the course of a year, along which the zodiacal constellations lie; the planets also move close to this band. Cancer, Virgo, and Leo are all zodiacal constellations positioned along it.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Cancer, Virgo, Leo raced the ecliptic down the southern night&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="effigies"><b>effigies</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="effigie"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> crude modeled figures or likenesses of people.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The men looked like mud effigies.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="egress"><b>egress</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="egres"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A way out; a path or means of exit from a place.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the Gilenos had decamped in small bands by every egress&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="egrets"><b>egrets</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="egret"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> tall, white, long-legged wading birds of the heron family.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Egrets in their rookeries white as candles among the moss.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="eitherhanded"><b>eitherhanded</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="eitherhandedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Dialectal and archaic term for ambidextrous&#8212;equally skilled with either hand.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he is as eitherhanded as a spider&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="companero"><b>El hombre que tiene usted. Mi companero.</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="hombre"/><idx:iform value="tiene"/><idx:iform value="usted"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;The man you have. My companion.&#8221; Glanton is demanding the release of David Brown from the jail.</p><p class="q">&#8220;El hombre que tiene usted. Mi companero.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="jefe"><b>El jefe</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;The chief&#8221; or &#8220;The boss&#8221;; the leader of a group.</p><p class="q">&#8220;El jefe, said the judge.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="joven"><b>El joven</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;The young one&#8221; or &#8220;The youth.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;El joven &#8230; El muchacho.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="joven"><b>El joven que &#8230;</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;The young man who &#8230;&#8221;; the sentence is cut off before the old woman can complete her declaration.</p><p class="q">&#8220;El joven que &#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="muchacho"><b>El muchacho</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;The boy&#8221; or &#8220;The lad.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;El hombre mas joven. El muchacho.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="negro"><b>El negro</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;The black man&#8221;; <em>negro</em> is the Spanish adjective and noun for black, used here as an identifying term without the specific pejorative weight it carries in English.</p><p class="q">&#8220;El negro, she said. El negro, cried the juggler.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="sauz"><b>El Sauz</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A settlement and valley in central Chihuahua, Mexico, north of the state capital; part of the El Sauz&#8211;Encinillas basin on the road south to Ciudad de Chihuahua.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the dry passes going toward El Sauz&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tonto"><b>El tonto</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;The fool&#8221;; in Spanish tarot and fortune-telling tradition the card of the fool or jester, equivalent to the Fool in the major arcana.</p><p class="q">&#8220;El tonto, he called.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="virote"><b>El virote</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;The bolt&#8221; or &#8220;the dart&#8221;; here referring to an arrow or lance-point lodged in a man&#8217;s body, the wound or the projectile itself.</p><p class="q">&#8220;El virote&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="eldress"><b>eldress</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="eldres"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An elderly woman of some standing or seniority; archaic feminine form of &#8220;elder.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;The eldress in the rocks&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="election"><b>election</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="elections"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In Calvinist theology, the divine choosing of certain souls for salvation; here used by the judge in a mock-theological sense to mean each man&#8217;s chosen fate or portion.</p><p class="q">&#8220;in possession of the fruits of their election&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="owls"><b>elf owls</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The world&#8217;s smallest owl species (<em>Micrathene whitneyi</em>), native to the Sonoran Desert and Mexico, where they nest in woodpecker holes in saguaro cacti and are strictly nocturnal.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the soft cries of elf owls among them&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="elias"><b>Elias</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> Jos&#233; Mar&#237;a El&#237;as Gonz&#225;lez, a Mexican military officer who served as commandant in Sonora in the 1840s and mounted campaigns against Apache raiders and foreign scalp-hunters operating in the state.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they encountered a party of armed Sonoran cavalry &#8230; under General Elias&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="elision"><b>elision</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="elisions"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Ordinarily the omission of a sound or syllable; McCarthy uses it here in an extended sense of continuous erasure or deletion &#8212; the riders moving through the landscape as if obliterating it.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they moved in a constant elision&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="emplaned"><b>emplaned</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="emplan"/><idx:iform value="emplane"/><idx:iform value="emplaneded"/><idx:iform value="emplaneding"/><idx:iform value="emplaneds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Spread out flat upon a plane or surface; here, clouds lying flat in layers upon a distant, calmer sea of color at the horizon.</p><p class="q">&#8220;island clouds emplaned upon a salmoncolored othersea&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="darkened"><b>en-darkened</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Plunged into or enveloped by darkness; a coinage formed by analogy with &#8220;enlightened,&#8221; meaning the opposite: shadowed, obscured.</p><p class="q">&#8220;luminosity in beings so en-darkened&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="encinillas"><b>Encinillas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A real location in Chihuahua state, Mexico, approximately 73 kilometres north of the city of Chihuahua; the site of a colonial-era hacienda on the Camino Real.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They fought them again at Encinillas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="endarkenment"><b>endarkenment</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="endarkenments"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A deliberate antonym of &#8220;enlightenment,&#8221; meaning a final darkening or extinction; not a standard dictionary term but coined on the obvious model.</p><p class="q">&#8220;drive the remorseless sun on to its final endarkenment&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="enfilade"><b>enfilade</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="enfilades"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A narrow file or column moving in a single line; from the military term for troops or a position exposed to gunfire along its length.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They rode in a narrow enfilade along a trail&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A long line or column of people or things exposed along their length; originally a military term for a line raked by gunfire, here used to mean a streaming column of fleeing refugees.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a whole enfilade of refugees had begun streaming north&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="enhearsed"><b>enhearsed</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="enhears"/><idx:iform value="enhearse"/><idx:iform value="enhearseded"/><idx:iform value="enhearseding"/><idx:iform value="enhearseds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Laid out as if on a hearse or bier; entombed within the coach with their weapons, arranged like the dead. An archaic formation from <em>hearse</em> (a bier or funeral frame).</p><p class="q">&#8220;they lay enhearsed with their weapons&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="enkindles"><b>enkindles</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="enkindle"/><idx:iform value="enkindlesed"/><idx:iform value="enkindlesing"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Sets alight; kindles into flame. An archaic, literary form of &#8220;kindle,&#8221; used here in the literal sense of striking fire from rock.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he enkindles the stone in the hole with his steel&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="entablatures"><b>entablatures</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="entablature"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In classical architecture, the horizontal superstructure resting on columns, consisting of architrave (plain beam), frieze (middle decorative band), and cornice (projecting top molding); a defining feature of Greek and Roman temple design.</p><p class="q">&#8220;vultures squatted along the dusty entablatures&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="entrained"><b>entrained</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="entrain"/><idx:iform value="entraine"/><idx:iform value="entraineded"/><idx:iform value="entraineding"/><idx:iform value="entraineds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> <b>1.</b> Moved onto or into (a route or surface), as troops board a train; here the company rides up onto the hollow ground.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they entrained upon a hollow ground&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> <b>2.</b> Caught up in and carried along by a current or flow; here, figuratively swept along across the desert as if borne by a stream.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The desert upon which they were entrained&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="epaulettes"><b>epaulettes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="epaulette"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Ornamental shoulder pieces on a military uniform, typically consisting of a strap with a fringed or padded pad; indicators of officer rank in European and American armies.</p><p class="q">&#8220;tarnished epaulettes of silver wire&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="equipage"><b>equipage</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="equipages"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Equipment, gear, and supplies; the outfit and accoutrements of a soldier or traveler.</p><p class="q">&#8220;some already seeing to their mounts or their equipage&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Equipment, outfit, and personal gear carried by a traveler; one&#8217;s complete set of supplies and baggage.</p><p class="q">&#8220;his leashed fool and his equipage&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="caballado"><b>Eres mozo del caballado?</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="eres"/><idx:iform value="mozo"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Are you the horse groom?&#8221; (<em>eres</em> = you are; <em>mozo</em> = groom/stable hand; <em>caballado</em> = archaic/regional for the horses/horse herd, from <em>caballada</em>).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Eres mozo del caballado?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="escapement"><b>escapement</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="escapements"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The mechanism in a clock or watch that controls the release of the gear train in measured, step-by-step increments, producing the characteristic ticking motion.</p><p class="q">&#8220;mechanisms whose movements are monitored with escapement and pallet&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="escarpment"><b>escarpment</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="escarpments"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A long, steep cliff or slope forming the edge of a plateau or ridge, typically created by erosion or faulting.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they came out upon an escarpment that seemed to rim the known world&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A long, steep cliff or rock face separating two relatively level surfaces; the abrupt vertical face of a plateau or ridge.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He made his way along the escarpment until he came to a break&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="escopeta"><b>escopeta</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="escopetas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> A light musket or short-barreled firearm; the standard shoulder arm of Spanish colonial cavalry on the northern frontier of Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the guard carried his escopeta at the ready&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> A musket or shotgun; from Italian scopetta.</p><p class="q">&#8220;one held an escopeta on him&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>3.</b> Historically a light smoothbore musket or cavalry carbine used in colonial and 19th-century Spanish America; the modern word means shotgun.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He stood down off his mule and drew his escopeta&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="escopetas"><b>escopetas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Light, smoothbore, muzzle-loading Spanish muskets or carbines, standard shoulder arms of the Spanish Colonial militia, used for nearly 200 years on the northern Mexican frontier.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they carried escopetas across the pommels of their saddles&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="esker"><b>esker</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="eskers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A long, narrow winding ridge of gravel and sand deposited by a meltwater stream running beneath a glacier. Eskers look like natural embankments or causeways. McCarthy uses the term precisely for such a gravelly ridge used as a vantage point.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they grouped their horses along a low esker of gravel&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A long, narrow ridge of sand and gravel deposited by a meltwater stream beneath or within a former glacier; in non-glacial deserts, used loosely for any winding sand ridge.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the crest of a shallow esker&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="eskers"><b>eskers</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="esker"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In geology, long winding ridges of sand and gravel deposited by meltwater beneath a glacier; McCarthy applies the term loosely to analogous desert sand ridges whose sinuous, crested shape resembles glacial eskers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;toiling up steep eskers where the wind blew the white pumice from the crests&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="gobernador"><b>Esta bien. Negocios del Gobernador.</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bien"/><idx:iform value="negocios"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;It&#8217;s fine. The Governor&#8217;s business.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Esta bien &#8230; Negocios del Gobernador.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="estancia"><b>estancia</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="estancias"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> A large rural estate or cattle ranch; in the Mexican and Spanish colonial context, a landed property with ranch buildings.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Out on the plain stood a small estancia where the buildings were still smoking&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="estancias"><b>estancias</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Large rural estates or cattle ranches; the standard term in Latin American Spanish for a substantial landed property with livestock.</p><p class="q">&#8220;from the pueblos and estancias through which they passed&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="encargo"><b>Este hombre es el jefe &#8212; Te encargo todo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="este"/><idx:iform value="hombre"/><idx:iform value="jefe"/><idx:iform value="todo"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;This man is the boss &#8212; I put you in charge of everything.&#8221; (<em>jefe</em> = chief/boss; <em>te encargo</em> = I entrust/charge you with; <em>todo</em> = everything).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Este hombre es el jefe&#8230; Te encargo todo, entiendes?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="borracho"><b>Est&#225; borracho</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="esta"/><idx:iform value="está"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;He is drunk.&#8221; The old man offers this to defuse the standoff between the kid and the armed barman.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Esta borracho, said the old man.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mettent"><b>Et de ceo se mettent en le pays</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pays"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(French)</i> Law French: &#8220;And of this they put themselves upon the country&#8221;; the traditional formula in common-law pleading by which parties submitted a disputed question of fact to a jury (&#8220;the country&#8221; meaning the local community acting as jurors).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Et de ceo se mettent en le pays.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="arcadia"><b>Et In Arcadia Ego</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Latin)</i> &#8220;Even in Arcadia, there am I&#8221;&#8212;a Latin phrase, spoken by Death personified, meaning that death is present even in paradise; a classic <em>memento mori</em> appearing in paintings by Poussin and others.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the name&#8230;set with silver wire&#8230;in latin: Et In Arcadia Ego&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="euchered"><b>euchered</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="eucher"/><idx:iform value="euchere"/><idx:iform value="euchereded"/><idx:iform value="euchereding"/><idx:iform value="euchereds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Cheated or swindled out of something one was entitled to; from the card game euchre, in which a player can be blocked from winning tricks they expected.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the death of the father&#8230; has euchered the son out of his patrimony&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="extemporary"><b>extemporary</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="extemporaryly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Delivered without preparation; improvised on the spot; a variant of <em>extemporaneous</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;holding an extemporary lecture in geology&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="muzzle"><b>false muzzle</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="false"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A removable brass extension fitted over the rifle&#8217;s muzzle only during loading, allowing a paper-patched bullet to be seated precisely without damaging the bore&#8217;s crown. It is removed before firing. Invented in 1840 by Alvan Clark and used exclusively on high-precision target rifles.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a heavy Wesson rifle that used a false muzzle&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="falstaffian"><b>falstaffian</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(allusion)</i> Resembling Falstaff, the fat, boastful, cowardly comic soldier in Shakespeare&#8217;s Henry IV plays; here applied to the ragged, motley militia of Santa Cruz to suggest buffoonish, ineffectual soldiers more show than substance.</p><p class="q">&#8220;this falstaffian militia with undisguised contempt&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="fandango"><b>fandango</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fandangos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A lively Spanish or Mexican dance in triple meter; in northern Mexico the word also broadly denotes a festive social gathering or party with music and dancing.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A fandango&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> Literally a lively Spanish or Latin American dance; in frontier usage, a raucous outdoor party or social gathering with dancing, drinking, and music.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A fandango&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="fard"><b>fard</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fards"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Archaic term for face paint or cosmetic pigment; here used for war paint applied to the Yuma warriors&#8217; faces.</p><p class="q">&#8220;their faces blacked or pale with fard&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="farrier"><b>farrier</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="farriers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A specialist who shoes horses and mules &#8212; trimming and shaping the hooves and nailing iron shoes to them; in a military unit, an essential tradesman who also did basic veterinary work.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the farrier saw to the mules and ponies that had thrown shoes&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A craftsman who trims and shoes horses&#8217; hooves, combining blacksmith and equine veterinary skills; an essential tradesman wherever horses were worked on rough terrain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They collected the remaining horses from the farrier&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="farriery"><b>farriery / farrier</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="farrier"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A farrier is a craftsman who shoes horses, combining blacksmithing with knowledge of equine hoof anatomy; a farriery (or farrier&#8217;s) is his workshop.</p><p class="q">&#8220;An hour later he was at the farriery&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="fastness"><b>fastness</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fastnes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Archaic: a remote, strongly defensible, or inaccessible place; a stronghold or refuge secured by its own terrain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;in the deepest fastness of those rocks he met with men&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="federal"><b>Federal road</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="road"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun phrase)</i> A road built or maintained by the U.S. federal government in the early nineteenth century to connect frontier settlements; major routes such as the Federal Road through Georgia and Alabama were constructed in this era.</p><p class="q">&#8220;kept a harness shop by the side of the Federal road&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="federated"><b>federated</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="federatedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Joined together into a unified body; here used figuratively to describe the riders linked to one another by shared alertness, as if wired into a single sensing network.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they were federated with invisible wires of vigilance&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="feldspar"><b>feldspar</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="feldspars"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The most abundant group of rock-forming minerals in the Earth&#8217;s crust, composed of aluminum silicates; here the ore samples are rich in copper oxide within a feldspar matrix.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the feldspar rich in red oxide of copper&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="felloes"><b>felloes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="felloe"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The curved wooden segments that fit together to form the outer rim of a wagon wheel, into which the spoke ends are seated and around which the iron tire is shrunk. Singular: felloe (also felly). They split and crack when the wood dries out.</p><p class="q">&#8220;wedges between the iron of the tires and the suncracked felloes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="felon"><b>felon wind</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="wind"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> An archaic usage of <em>felon</em> as an adjective meaning cruel, wicked, or deadly (from Old French <em>felon</em>, evil); a felon wind is thus a malignant, killing wind.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The felon wind&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ferric"><b>ferric</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ferricly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Of or relating to iron; containing iron. From Latin <em>ferrum</em> = iron.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the ferric nature of heavenly bodies&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ferrylanding"><b>ferrylanding</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ferrylandings"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A landing stage or dock where a ferry takes on and discharges passengers and cargo.</p><p class="q">&#8220;on the west bank of the river overlooking the ferrylanding&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="filibuster"><b>filibuster</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="filibusters"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In 19th-century usage, a private citizen who leads or joins an unauthorized armed expedition into a foreign country to foment revolution or seize territory, without his own government&#8217;s sanction; from Spanish <em>filibustero</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Do ye cross that river with yon filibuster armed&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="filibusters"><b>filibusters</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="filibuster"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In 1840s&#8211;50s American usage, private adventurers who raised unofficial armies to invade foreign countries for political or financial gain &#8212; not the modern legislative tactic. The word derives from Spanish <em>filibustero</em> and Dutch <em>vrijbuiter</em> (&#8220;freebooter&#8221;).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Setting forth with the filibusters&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="finials"><b>finials</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="finial"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The decorative ornamental knobs or carvings at the top or end of a bedpost, spire, or rod; the terminal ornamental elements of the bed&#8217;s uprights.</p><p class="q">&#8220;his weapons hung in a rich array from the finials&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="fistula"><b>fistula</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fistulas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An abnormal channel or tunnel formed by infection or injury, here connecting the wound interior to the surface; a chronic suppurating passage around a foreign body.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A soft fistula had formed about it&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="flasks"><b>flasks</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="flask"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In this context, powder flasks: metal containers with a measured-charge spout used to dispense black powder into firearm chambers during loading.</p><p class="q">&#8220;gang-molds and flasks and tools&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="flatboat"><b>flatboat</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="flatboats"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> a flat-bottomed boat used to carry goods and passengers downriver.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He is taken on for New Orleans aboard a flatboat.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="flatcrowned"><b>flatcrowned</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="flatcrownedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Having a flat, horizontal top to the hat&#8217;s crown, as opposed to a rounded or peaked crown; a common style in Mexican and Spanish dress.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the men in dark flatcrowned hats&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="flatwise"><b>flatwise</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="flatwised"/><idx:iform value="flatwises"/><idx:iform value="flatwising"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adverb)</i> with the flat side laid down or against a surface.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;his hands placed flatwise on the wood&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="flensed"><b>flensed</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="flensedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Stripped of skin or flesh; from Dutch <em>flensen</em> (from Old Norse <em>flesja</em>, &#8220;to flay&#8221;), originally meaning to strip blubber from a whale, extended to any thorough flaying.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the flensed and naked skulls of cows and sheep&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="fletching"><b>fletching</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fletchings"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The stabilizing feather vanes at the rear of an arrow, traditionally made from split bird feathers; they create drag that keeps the heavier arrowhead pointing forward in flight.</p><p class="q">&#8220;another arrow in his breast to the fletching&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> The feathers or vanes fixed to the rear end of an arrow to stabilise its flight; the term refers to that feathered section of the shaft.</p><p class="q">&#8220;an arrow in his thigh, fletching and all&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="fletchings"><b>fletchings</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fletching"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The feather or vane stabilizers fixed to the rear of an arrow to make it fly true; they catch the light as the arrows arc upward.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the sun on their fletchings&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hides"><b>flint hides</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="flint"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Buffalo hides that have been dried stiff in the sun (as hard as flint) rather than being processed wet; the standard form in which hunters shipped hides to market.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the flint hides by the ton&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="flintknappings"><b>flintknappings</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="flintknapping"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The chips and debris produced by flintknapping &#8212; the craft of shaping flint, chert, or obsidian by striking it to produce sharp-edged tools such as arrowheads and scrapers; scattered knapping debris marks a prehistoric tool-making site.</p><p class="q">&#8220;an old reliquary of flintknappings and ratchel&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="flintlock"><b>flintlock</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="flintlocks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A firearm ignition mechanism in which a piece of flint strikes a steel frizzen to produce sparks that fire the priming charge; the standard gun technology of the 18th century, already outdated by the 1840s&#8211;50s.</p><p class="q">&#8220;an oldfashioned military pistol with a flint lock&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="fluepipe"><b>fluepipe</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fluepipes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A pipe forming the smoke channel (flue) of a stove; a stovepipe.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The fluepipe moaned and he heard the mule stamp&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="fond"><b>fond</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fondly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> In its archaic sense: foolish, infatuated, or doting; not the modern meaning of &#8220;affectionate.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;they rode infatuate and half fond&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="fontanel"><b>fontanel</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fontanels"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The soft membranous gap between the unfused bones of an infant&#8217;s skull; it closes as the child matures.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the brains burst forth through the fontanel&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="footlamps"><b>footlamps</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="footlamp"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Footlights; the row of lights along the front edge of a stage at floor level that illuminate performers from below.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the rabble hooting at them across the smoking footlamps&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="foresight"><b>foresight</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="foresights"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The front sight of a rifle, the small projection at the muzzle end used to aim the weapon.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the sun on the side of the silver foresight&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="forestock"><b>forestock</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="forestocks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The forward section of a rifle&#8217;s wooden stock, running beneath the barrel ahead of the action, which the off hand grips when aiming.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the forestock was much worn beneath&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="forsworn"><b>forsworn</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="forsworned"/><idx:iform value="forsworning"/><idx:iform value="forsworns"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Past participle of <em>forswear</em>: to renounce or repudiate solemnly; to give up entirely under oath. Here used loosely to mean &#8220;long since abandoned.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;He&#8217;d long forsworn all weighing of consequence&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="griffin"><b>Fort Griffin</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fort"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A U.S. Army post established in 1867 in Shackelford County, northwest Texas, and the adjacent civilian settlement (known as &#8220;The Flat&#8221;) that became a major supply point for buffalo hunters and one of the wildest frontier towns of the 1870s.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Fort Griffin&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="smith"><b>Fort Smith</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fort"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> a frontier town on the Arkansas River at the edge of Indian Territory.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;he was run out of Fort Smith Arkansas&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="found"><b>found</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="founds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> food and lodging given to a worker in addition to cash wages.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;working for day wages and found.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="fredericksburg"><b>Fredericksburg</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fredericksburgs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A town in the Texas Hill Country, founded in 1846 by German immigrants; &#8220;the dutch settlements&#8221; in the preceding phrase refers to the German (&#8220;Deutsch&#8221;) colonists of that region.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He come crawlin into Fredericksburg&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="freightdeck"><b>freightdeck</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="freightdecks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The exterior roof rack or luggage platform on top of a stagecoach, where freight, trunks, and baggage were tied down.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Two men climbed to the freightdeck&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="fremont"><b>Fremont</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fremonts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> Fremont Landing, a short-lived Gold Rush settlement in Yolo County, California, on the Sacramento River; founded March 1849, made county seat April 1850, and largely abandoned by 1851 after repeated flooding.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they set out for Fremont on the Sacramento River&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="fretwork"><b>fretwork</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fretworks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Ornamental work of interlaced or perforated patterns, typically cut from thin metal or wood; here the decorative ironwork framing of a public gazebo.</p><p class="q">&#8220;strung about the iron fretwork of the gazebo&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="frieze"><b>frieze</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="friezes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A decorative or pictorial band; here used figuratively for a thin horizontal line of mounted riders seen at a distance, resembling a carved relief.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a thin frieze of mounted archers&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="river"><b>Frio River</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="frio"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A river rising in the Edwards Plateau of southwest Texas and flowing southeast roughly 200 miles before joining the Nueces River.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they crossed the Frio River&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="frizzen"><b>frizzen</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="frizzens"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The L-shaped hinged steel plate on a flintlock that the flint strikes to produce sparks; it also covers the priming pan. Raking it open exposes and dumps the priming powder, rendering the pistol unfireable.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He raked the frizzen open against the bartop and dumped the priming out&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="frog"><b>frog</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="frogs"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The triangular, rubbery pad of softer tissue on the underside of a horse&#8217;s hoof, which absorbs shock and aids traction; injury or splitting of the frog causes lameness.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The frog of the hoof was split and bloody&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="frogged"><b>frogged</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="froggedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Decorated with frog fastenings &#8212; ornamental braided loops and toggle buttons used to close the front of a military coat. Originating in Hungarian hussar uniforms and adopted across European cavalry dress, extensive frogging was a mark of elite cavalry jackets.</p><p class="q">&#8220;frogged and braided cavalry jackets&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="frogged"><b>frogged coat</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="coat"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A coat fastened with frogs: ornamental braided or corded loops and toggle buttons that serve as closures, originally associated with hussar military uniforms.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a lesser chieftain named Pascual in a frogged coat out at the elbows&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>
