<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf">
<head><meta charset="utf-8"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="dict.css"/></head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="perros"><b>Perros a vende</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="vende"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Dogs for sale&#8221; &#8212; McCarthy renders the boy&#8217;s vernacular or semiliterate speech; standard Spanish would be <em>perros en venta</em> or <em>perros a vender</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Perros a vende, he said&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pesos"><b>pesos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> The basic monetary unit of Mexico; here the bounty currency for Glanton&#8217;s capture.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a price of eight thousand pesos posted for Glanton&#8217;s head&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pesthouse"><b>pesthouse</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pesthouses"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> a building set apart to house people sick with a contagious disease.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;a diptheria pesthouse.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="phantasmagoria"><b>phantasmagoria</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="phantasmagorias"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A bewildering or dreamlike sequence of shifting images or scenes; originally a 19th-century magic-lantern show of moving projected images.</p><p class="q">&#8220;blooming like phantasmagoria in a fever land&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pickets"><b>pickets</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="picket"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Soldiers posted as sentries around a camp to guard against surprise; an outpost of the guard.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The pickets saw the tent lumber horribly away into the night.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pictographs"><b>pictographs</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pictograph"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Images painted (not carved) onto rock faces by ancient peoples, using natural pigments; distinguished from petroglyphs, which are incised or pecked into stone.</p><p class="q">&#8220;pictographs of horse and cougar and turtle&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pieces"><b>pieces</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="piece"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Military term for artillery guns or cannons.</p><p class="q">&#8220;chained to the trailspades of their pieces&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="lead"><b>pig of lead</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> A molded block of lead cast in a small ingot shape (so called because smelted metal cast in rows of molds resembled a sow with piglets); used to be melted down and cast into bullets.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a small pig of lead&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pigeontailed"><b>pigeontailed coat</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="coat"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A tailcoat &#8212; a formal coat cut away at the front waist with two long tails hanging at the back (also called a swallowtail or spiketail coat). The tails were said to resemble a pigeon&#8217;s tail feathers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;one in a pigeontailed coat worn backwards&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pilotbread"><b>pilotbread</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pilotbreads"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Hard, dry biscuit (hardtack) used as sea and trail rations; extremely long-lasting and resistant to spoilage.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he sat in the herders&#8217; camp and ate beans and pilotbread&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pimeria"><b>Pimeria Alta</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="alta"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A historic Spanish colonial region encompassing what is now southern Arizona and the adjacent part of Sonora, Mexico; named for the Pima (Tohono O&#8217;odham) people who inhabited it.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a treelimb in the wastes of Pimeria Alta&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pinole"><b>pinole</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pinoles"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Roasted, finely ground maize (corn), sometimes mixed with cacao or sugar; a Nahuatl-origin staple food (<em>pinolli</em>) of indigenous Mexican and Southwest cultures, extremely portable and mixed with water to make a drink or porridge.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They ate pinole from a bag with their fingers&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> Finely ground roasted maize (from Nahuatl <em>pinolli</em>), eaten dry or mixed with water as a simple, sustaining food or drink.</p><p class="q">&#8220;bowls of cold pinole&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> A coarse flour or meal made from ground roasted grain or seeds (often maize); a traditional food of many Native American peoples of the Southwest and Mexico, sometimes made from other dried plant matter.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a sort of pinole made from dried and pounded grasshoppers&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pinon"><b>pinon</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pinons"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The pi&#241;on pine (<em>Pinus edulis</em> and related species), a small pine native to the arid highlands of the Southwest whose seeds&#8212;pine nuts&#8212;were a staple food for Native Americans and travelers alike.</p><p class="q">&#8220;foragin&#8230;for pinon nuts like bears&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pipeclay"><b>pipeclay</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pipeclays"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A fine white clay used to make tobacco pipes and to whiten leather; here used as a color comparison for the old woman&#8217;s extremely pale, chalky complexion.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a weathered old woman the color of pipeclay&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pirouettes"><b>pirouettes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pirouette"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Rapid spinning turns on one foot, a ballet movement; here the judge spins in the dance.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he pirouettes and makes a pass, two passes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pistola"><b>Pistola</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pistolas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Pistol&#8221;; a firearm.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Pistola, he said&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pitchtent"><b>pitchtent</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pitchtents"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A small tent set up for a performance or show; a sideshow or carnival booth.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The circus folk had set up a little pitchtent in the dusty plaza&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A tent waterproofed or stiffened with pitch (tar); the term describes a provisional shelter, here associated with a traveling performer or juggler.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the fire was cold before the pitchtent&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pitero"><b>pitero</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="piteros"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> A musician who plays the <em>pito</em> (a small pipe or reed flute); a piper.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They were led by a pitero piping a reed&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pizzle"><b>pizzle</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pizzles"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The penis of an animal; in older English also applied (crudely) to a man&#8217;s penis.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he&#8217;d took out his pizzle and he was pissin into the mixture&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> The penis of an animal; here used crudely for the man&#8217;s own. An archaic and dialectal term.</p><p class="q">&#8220;with his pizzle in one hand&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pinon"><b>pi&#241;on</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pinons"/><idx:iform value="piñon"/><idx:iform value="piñons"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Pi&#241;on pine (<em>Pinus edulis</em> and related species); a small, slow-growing evergreen conifer of the arid Southwest and northern Mexico, valued for its edible nuts.</p><p class="q">&#8220;made camp &#8230; among pi&#241;on and juniper&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> The pi&#241;on pine (Pinus edulis), a small drought-hardy tree common on dry slopes and mesas of the southwestern United States between roughly 4,500 and 9,000 feet elevation; its seeds (pine nuts) are an important food source.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they came up through pi&#241;on and scruboak&#8230;&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> Any of several small pines (*Pinus edulis* and related species) native to the arid mountains of the American Southwest and Mexico, growing at middle elevations; they produce edible pine nuts and characterize the transition zone between desert and high conifer forest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They began to come upon pinon and dwarf oak&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="agustin"><b>Plains of San Agustin</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="plains"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A large, flat, high-altitude basin in western New Mexico, formed by an ancient Pleistocene lake bed; today the site of the Very Large Array radio observatory.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the plains of San Agustin stretching away to the northeast&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="planewise"><b>planewise</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="planewised"/><idx:iform value="planewises"/><idx:iform value="planewising"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adverb)</i> In planes or flat sheets &#8212; spreading and flaring horizontally in flat layers. A McCarthy coinage or very rare usage describing how the dawn light floods the sky in horizontal bands.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a deeper run of color&#8230;flaring planewise&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="plateland"><b>plateland</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="platelands"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A McCarthy coinage for an expansive flat expanse of cracked or open desert ground; a vast level plain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;that vast and broken plateland&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="playa"><b>playa</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="playas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A flat, dry lake bed or basin in a desert region, formed when a former lake evaporated; the floor is typically fine-grained silt or salt that leaves no tracks.</p><p class="q">&#8220;crossing the western edge of the playa&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A flat, dry lakebed in a desert basin, the remnant of a lake that has evaporated; usually covered in fine sediment, salt, or clay, and among the flattest surfaces in nature. From Spanish <em>playa</em>, beach.</p><p class="q">&#8220;these shapes &#8230; turning to swirl away over the playa&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pleiades"><b>Pleiades</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>1.</b> An open star cluster in the constellation Taurus, one of the nearest to Earth and visible to the naked eye as a tight grouping of six to seven stars; used since antiquity for navigation and calendar-keeping.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the Pleiades straight overhead and very small&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A prominent open star cluster in the constellation Taurus, also called the Seven Sisters; one of the most conspicuous naked-eye clusters in the sky, used for millennia as a seasonal marker.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the Pleiades winked in the very roof of the vault&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="plovers"><b>plovers</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="plover"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Small to medium-sized shorebirds (family Charadriidae) with compact bodies and short bills; used here as an image of a small bird dwarfed by the immense vultures above.</p><p class="q">&#8220;more like terns or plovers&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="plug"><b>plug hat</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A top hat &#8212; the tall, flat-crowned cylindrical hat with a narrow brim, shaped on a wooden plug during manufacture; a mark of respectable mid-19th-century dress.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he wore a plug hat of dusty black silk&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="poblanos"><b>poblanos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Literally &#8220;people of the pueblo&#8221; or &#8220;townspeople&#8221;; inhabitants of a pueblo (village), here the Mexican villagers massacred at Nacozari.</p><p class="q">&#8220;nothing remained of the poblanos save this charred coagulate&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="poke"><b>poke</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pokes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A small bag or sack; here a leather drawstring pouch for carrying coins.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Brown scooped the coins back into the poke&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="polestar"><b>polestar</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="polestars"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Polaris, the North Star &#8212; the star that sits nearly directly above Earth&#8217;s north pole and appears fixed in the sky while other stars rotate around it, making it the primary reference point for night navigation.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Tethered to the polestar they rode the Dipper round&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="polyps"><b>polyps</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="polyp"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Individual zoological organisms of coral or sea-anemone colonies: small, pale, cylindrical creatures with a soft, glistening, wet surface; McCarthy uses the image to evoke the look of exposed, damp skulls.</p><p class="q">&#8220;peeled skulls like polyps bluely wet or luminescent melons&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pommel"><b>pommel</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pommels"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The raised front arch of a saddle &#8212; on a Western saddle, this includes the horn; on others, simply the forward rise that braces the rider.</p><p class="q">&#8220;scabbards that mounted across the pommel of the saddle&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> The raised front knob or arch of a saddle, forming the forward peak of the seat; a standard part of Western and military saddle construction.</p><p class="q">&#8220;put them across the pommel of Glanton&#8217;s saddle&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ponderable"><b>ponderable</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ponderablely"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Of appreciable weight or substance; here meaning the hermit is a man of real, solid bodily presence despite his madness.</p><p class="q">&#8220;But a ponderable body for that&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dios"><b>por dios</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;For God&#8217;s sake&#8221; &#8212; a common beggar&#8217;s plea; the phrase from which <em>pordiosero</em> (beggar) derives.</p><p class="q">&#8220;crying out por dios&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="busca"><b>Por qu&#233; me busca?</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Why are you looking for me?&#8221; (<em>por qu&#233;</em> = why; <em>me busca</em> = looks for me, formal).</p><p class="q">&#8220;For que me busca? called the old man after him&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="esconde"><b>Por qu&#233; se esconde?</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Why are you hiding?&#8221; (<em>por qu&#233;</em> = why; <em>se esconde</em> = reflexive, formal address: hides himself/yourself).</p><p class="q">&#8220;For que se esconde? said Glanton&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="porphyry"><b>porphyry</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="porphyries"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Igneous rock characterized by large, visible crystals set in a finer-grained matrix; from Greek <em>porphyra</em>, &#8220;purple&#8221; &#8212; the prized deep-purple Egyptian imperial porphyry was reserved for Roman emperors.</p><p class="q">&#8220;idlers reclined on carven seats of white porphyry&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="portico"><b>portico</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="porticos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A covered walkway or porch supported by columns, typically at the entrance or along the front of a building.</p><p class="q">&#8220;up the far side past a long portico toward the lights&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="portmanteau"><b>portmanteau</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="portmanteaus"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A large leather traveling bag or trunk that opens into two hinged compartments; from French <em>porter</em> (&#8220;to carry&#8221;) + <em>manteau</em> (&#8220;coat&#8221;).</p><p class="q">&#8220;reaching for his portmanteau&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A large leather traveling bag that opens into two hinged compartments; a suitcase-like piece of luggage, from French porter (to carry) + manteau (coat).</p><p class="q">&#8220;the judge&#8230; took up his portmanteau and stepped out the door&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> A large leather traveling bag that opens into two hinged compartments; a piece of luggage.</p><p class="q">&#8220;his portmanteau and a canvas rucksack&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="posada"><b>posada</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="posadas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> An inn or lodging house.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the shed behind the posada where the horses were stabled&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="possibles"><b>possibles</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="possible"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Frontier and trapper slang for a person&#8217;s personal gear, supplies, and equipment; whatever one carries in a possible bag or on one&#8217;s person.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Bring ye bed. Bring ye possibles.&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Frontier term for one&#8217;s personal kit of essential supplies &#8212; everything one might &#8220;possibly need&#8221; in the field; a &#8220;possibles bag&#8221; held flint, tinder, food, tools, and other necessaries.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Did you not save any of your possibles?&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> A frontiersman&#8217;s term for his personal kit of essential gear and supplies&#8212;whatever he might possibly need; carried in a &#8220;possibles bag.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;he shook out the wagonsheet and folded it away among his possibles&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pothole"><b>pothole</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="potholes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A natural basin or depression in rock or desert terrain that collects and holds rainwater; a desert water source, not a road defect.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they watered at a stagnant pothole&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="potsherd"><b>potsherd</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="potsherds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A fragment of broken pottery, especially one found at an archaeological site.</p><p class="q">&#8220;flint or potsherd or tool of bone&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="powderhorn"><b>powderhorn</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="powderhorns"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A container for gunpowder, traditionally made from a cow or ox horn, used to carry a supply of black powder for muzzle-loading firearms.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he carried a powderhorn and flask&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="powderhouse"><b>powderhouse</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="powderhouses"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A stone or brick building for storing gunpowder and military ammunition; a magazine.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the tall stone powderhouse in the distance&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="prefiguration"><b>prefiguration</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="prefigurations"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Something that foreshadows or anticipates a future event; in Christian typology, an Old Testament person or event that typologically represents a New Testament reality.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they watched like the prefiguration of their own ends&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="presidio"><b>presidio</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="presidios"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> A Spanish colonial fortified garrison town; a walled military post established to defend frontier settlements, here referring to the ancient walled town of Janos.</p><p class="q">&#8220;An ancient walled presidio composed wholly of mud&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> A military garrison or fort, especially one built by the Spanish colonial government to protect a settlement or frontier region.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the old presidio, a large triangular building of adobe with round towers&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>3.</b> A Spanish colonial military fort or garrison; many presidios were established throughout northern Mexico and the American Southwest to protect settlements against Apache raids.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the presidio was collapsing back into the earth&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="presidio"><b>presidio of Tucson</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="tucson"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> Presidio San Agust&#237;n del Tucson, a Spanish adobe-walled fort established in 1775 to defend against Apache raids, whose garrison moved there from Tubac in 1776. By 1849 it was a small, decaying Mexican border town built around the ruins of this fort.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The presidio of Tucson&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="presidio"><b>Presidio road</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="road"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A road linking the chain of Spanish colonial presidios (military outposts) in Texas, running roughly from San Antonio toward the Rio Grande. &#8220;Presidio&#8221; is Spanish for a garrisoned military fort.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they left the Presidio road&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="presidios"><b>presidios</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="presidio"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Spanish colonial military garrisons and frontier forts, around which civilian settlements grew; the defining institution of Spain&#8217;s northern borderland defense.</p><p class="q">&#8220;all the presidios along the border&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="prestidigitant"><b>prestidigitant</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="prestidigitants"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> One who performs prestidigitation; a sleight-of-hand conjurer. From French <em>preste</em> (nimble) + Latin <em>digitus</em> (finger).</p><p class="q">&#8220;The judge prestidigitant&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="preterite"><b>preterite</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="preteritely"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> In Calvinist theology, the &#8220;preterite&#8221; are those whom God has passed over in election&#8212;the non-elect, condemned before birth, their lives outside saving grace; from Latin *praeterire*, &#8220;to pass by.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;nothing remained &#8230; save this charred coagulate of their preterite lives&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="priapic"><b>priapic</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="priapicly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Relating to Priapus, the Greek god of fertility depicted with a permanent erection; hence, resembling an obscene leer or a phallic grin.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he presented the Americans with a strange priapic leer&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="primer"><b>primer</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="primers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The percussion cap or priming charge that ignites the main powder charge in a firearm when struck by the hammer.</p><p class="q">&#8220;flicked away the spent primer with his thumb&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pritchel"><b>pritchel</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pritchels"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A pointed steel punch used by farriers and blacksmiths to drive out or enlarge nail holes in horseshoes; here used to pry open a crate.</p><p class="q">&#8220;pried open the box with a pritchel and a shoeing hammer&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="probate"><b>probate</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="probates"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The legal process by which a deceased person&#8217;s estate is administered and assets are inventoried or distributed; here used ironically to describe Glanton&#8217;s summary going-through and burning of a dead man&#8217;s belongings.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A probate&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Here used in the sense of a settlement or division of a dead person&#8217;s estate; the process of distributing a deceased&#8217;s belongings among survivors.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Another probate&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="procrustean"><b>procrustean</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="procrusteanly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Producing conformity by arbitrary or violent means, regardless of individual circumstances; from Procrustes, the Greek mythological brigand who stretched or cut off the legs of travelers to make them fit his iron bed.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they were operating a sort of procrustean ferry&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="proctors"><b>proctors</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="proctor"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Here used in the sense of agents or managers who act on behalf of others; in this context, those who organize or manage beggars for profit.</p><p class="q">&#8220;beggars and proctors of beggars and whores and pimps&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="promontory"><b>promontory</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="promontories"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A high point of land projecting out and overlooking lower ground; a bluff or headland with a commanding view.</p><p class="q">&#8220;out upon a promontory overlooking a bleak and barren caldera&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="proselytes"><b>proselytes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="proselyte"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> New converts to a belief or doctrine; the squatters are brought around to accept the judge&#8217;s geological views as a kind of creed.</p><p class="q">&#8220;right proselytes of the new order&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="protocol"><b>protocol</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="protocols"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Here used in its formal, near-archaic sense: an established code or set of rules governing procedure or conduct; the proper order of events demanded by some larger design.</p><p class="q">&#8220;that larger protocol exacted by the formal agenda of an absolute destiny&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pugmill"><b>pugmill</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pugmills"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A machine that mixes and kneads clay or similar materials by means of rotating paddles on a central shaft; in pre-industrial settings typically powered by a horse or burro walking in a circle around the central post.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A blindfolded burro tethered to a pole was turning a pugmill, circling endlessly&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pulque"><b>pulque</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pulques"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A traditional Mexican alcoholic drink made from the fermented sap (<em>aguamiel</em>) of the maguey plant (<em>Agave</em> spp.); milky white in color, mildly alcoholic, of pre-Columbian origin.</p><p class="q">&#8220;hogskins filled with pulque that swung from the beams&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pumice"><b>pumice</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pumices"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A very lightweight, porous volcanic rock formed from rapidly cooled lava; so full of gas bubbles it can float on water and has a fine, abrasive texture.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the wind blew the white pumice from the crests like the spume from sea swells&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="purlieu"><b>purlieu</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="purlieus"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The outlying or surrounding land attached to a larger property; grounds or enclosure adjacent to a main building.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a barren purlieu that held a few goats and burros&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="purlieus"><b>purlieus</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="purlieu"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The surroundings or immediate environs of a place; its outlying precincts or neighborhood. Originally an English legal term for land adjacent to a royal forest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Bone palings ruled the small and dusty purlieus&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="putrescent"><b>putrescent</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="putrescently"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> In the process of rotting and decaying; here describing hats fouled with dried blood, filth, and scalps.</p><p class="q">&#8220;waving&#8230; their putrescent hats&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pyracantha"><b>pyracantha</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pyracanthas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Firethorn; a thorny evergreen shrub (genus <em>Pyracantha</em>) bearing clusters of small white flowers and bright red or orange berries, native to parts of Europe and Asia but naturalized widely; here growing among desert scrub in northern Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;mesquite and pyracantha singlefile&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pyrolatrous"><b>pyrolatrous</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pyrolatrou"/><idx:iform value="pyrolatrously"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Fire-worshipping; from Greek <em>pyro</em> (fire) + <em>latry</em> (worship), a rare formal adjective.</p><p class="q">&#8220;sat at the fire like ghosts&#8230; rapt, pyrolatrous&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="quadrille"><b>quadrille</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="quadrilles"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A square dance performed by four couples arranged in a square, popular at formal and semi-formal balls in Europe and America throughout the 19th century; its figures were called out by a caller or leader.</p><p class="q">&#8220;soon a quadrille was struck up&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="quarter"><b>quarter eagle</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="eagle"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A U.S. gold coin with a face value of two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50); so called because the standard &#8220;eagle&#8221; gold coin was worth ten dollars.</p><p class="q">&#8220;We got this quarter eagle to drink up yet&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="quarterwise"><b>quarterwise</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="quarterwised"/><idx:iform value="quarterwises"/><idx:iform value="quarterwising"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adverb)</i> At a quarter-turn; sideways or obliquely, so that one side faces the other party rather than head-on. An archaic formation from &#8220;quarter&#8221; (a fourth of a full rotation) + &#8220;-wise&#8221; (in the manner of).</p><p class="q">&#8220;He turned his mount quarterwise to the judge&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pasa"><b>Que pasa aqu&#237;?</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="aqui"/><idx:iform value="aquí"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;What is happening here?&#8221; or &#8220;What&#8217;s going on here?&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Que pasa aqu&#237;?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ustedes"><b>Que pasa con ustedes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="pasa"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;What is happening with you (plural)?&#8221; or &#8220;What is wrong with you people?&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Que pasa con ustedes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="quiere"><b>Que quiere?</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;What do you want?&#8221; &#8212; a direct, informal demand.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Que quiere? cried the leader&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="quena"><b>quena</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="quenas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An end-blown notch flute traditional to the Andes, with six finger holes and one thumb hole, historically made from cane or bone. McCarthy applies this Andean term to the bone flutes of the Comanche raiders; the quena is specifically a South American instrument with no documented connection to Comanche musical culture.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the piping of the quena, flutes made from human bones&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="querent"><b>querent</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="querents"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The person who asks a question and has their fortune told in a divination or tarot reading; from Latin <em>quaerens</em>, one who seeks.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The dark querent stood solemnly, like a man arraigned.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="quien"><b>Quien, quien</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Who, who?&#8221;; <em>qui&#233;n</em> = who. The juggler&#8217;s call asking which man will draw a card next.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Quien, quien, cried the juggler.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hecharse"><b>Quiere hecharse una copa&#8230; pero no puede pagar</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="copa"/><idx:iform value="pagar"/><idx:iform value="pero"/><idx:iform value="puede"/><idx:iform value="quiere"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;He wants to have a drink&#8230; but he can&#8217;t pay.&#8221; The old man relays the kid&#8217;s request to the barman.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Quiere hecharse una copa, he said. Pero no puede pagar.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="trabajo"><b>Quiere trabajo&#8230; Qui&#233;n sabe</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="quien"/><idx:iform value="quiere"/><idx:iform value="quién"/><idx:iform value="sabe"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;He wants work&#8230; Who knows.&#8221; The old man adds that the kid is offering labor, then shrugs.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Quiere trabajo, said the old man. Quien sabe.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="trabajar"><b>Quieres trabajar</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="quieres"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;You want to work?&#8221; (informal second person); one of the bar men echoes the old man&#8217;s words mockingly.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Quieres trabajar, said one of the men at the bar.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="pistola"><b>Quiero mirar su pistola</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="mirar"/><idx:iform value="quiero"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;I want to look at your pistol.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Quiero mirar su pistola, the man said&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="quirt"><b>quirt</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="quirts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A short riding whip with a braided rawhide lash, used to urge or discipline horses and associated with the American Southwest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a plaited rawhide quirt&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="quirted"><b>quirted</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="quirt"/><idx:iform value="quirte"/><idx:iform value="quirteded"/><idx:iform value="quirteding"/><idx:iform value="quirteds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> <b>1.</b> Struck with a quirt, a short riding whip with a braided leather lash, to urge a horse to speed.</p><p class="q">&#8220;turned their horses and quirted them&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> <b>2.</b> Struck with a quirt; a quirt is a short riding whip with a braided leather lash, used to urge or punish a horse or, here, a dog.</p><p class="q">&#8220;leaned down and quirted it viciously with his hobble rope&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="quits"><b>quits</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="quit"/><idx:iform value="quitsly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> even; square, with nothing more owed&#8212;here, finished fighting.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;are you quits?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="muchacho"><b>Qu&#233; dice el muchacho</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="dice"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;What does the boy say?&#8221; The barman asks the old man to translate the kid&#8217;s English request.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Qu&#233; dice el muchacho.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="valientes"><b>Qu&#233; soldados tan valientes. La sangre de Gomez, sangre de la gente&#8230;</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="gente"/><idx:iform value="gomez"/><idx:iform value="sangre"/><idx:iform value="soldados"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;What brave soldiers. The blood of Gomez, blood of the people&#8230;&#8221;; the old man laments the human cost of the Apache war, linking G&#243;mez&#8217;s blood to that of ordinary Mexicans.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Qu&#233; soldados tan valientes. La sangre de Gomez, sangre de la gente&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tiene"><b>Qu&#233; tiene all&#225;?</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="alla"/><idx:iform value="allá"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;What do you have there?&#8221; (<em>qu&#233;</em> = what; <em>tiene</em> = you have, formal; <em>all&#225;</em> = there).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Que tiene alia?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="raggletag"><b>raggletag</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="raggletagly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Ragged and disorderly; an archaic or dialectal variant of <em>ragtag</em> or <em>raggle-taggle</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The raggletag advent of the riders was howled about by a few wet dogs&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="railhead"><b>railhead</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="railheads"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The furthest point reached by a railway line; in the context of the buffalo trade, the town where hides were loaded onto freight cars for shipment east.</p><p class="q">&#8220;how many hides reached the railhead&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="raillery"><b>raillery</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="railleries"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Good-natured teasing or banter; playful, harmless mockery among companions. From French <em>raillerie</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a clank of canteens and endless raillery&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ramada"><b>ramada</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ramadas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> An open-sided shelter with a roof but no walls, built traditionally in the American Southwest and northern Mexico from poles and brush to provide shade while allowing airflow; from Spanish <em>rama</em>, branch.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They pass along a ramada in a courtyard by an old grape arbor&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ratchel"><b>ratchel</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ratchels"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Northern English and Scottish dialect for stony subsoil or rubble &#8212; fragments of rock and gravelly crust; from French <em>rocaille</em>, stony ground.</p><p class="q">&#8220;flintknappings and ratchel scattered about on the stone floor&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="razorous"><b>razorous</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="razorou"/><idx:iform value="razorously"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Razor-sharp; having the quality of a razor. An archaic or rare adjective form of &#8220;razor.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;sky and earth closed in a razorous plane&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="riot"><b>read him riot</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="read"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> A shortened form of &#8220;read him the riot act&#8221;: to rebuke or reprimand someone severely. Derived from the British Riot Act of 1714, which an officer would literally read aloud to disperse unlawful assemblies; by the 19th century it had become a figurative idiom for giving someone a sharp scolding.</p><p class="q">&#8220;she read him riot&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="reata"><b>reata</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="reatas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A braided rawhide lasso used for roping; from Spanish *la reata* (the rope). The English word &#8220;lariat&#8221; is a corruption of the same phrase.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the kid held the woven reata while the judge took up a round rock&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="rebate"><b>rebate</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="rebates"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In this archaic sense, a diminution or reduction &#8212; the furthest limit of attenuation or falling-away. From Old French <em>rabattre</em> (&#8220;to beat down, reduce&#8221;). Not the modern financial refund.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the uttermost rebate of space&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="rebated"><b>rebated</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="rebat"/><idx:iform value="rebate"/><idx:iform value="rebateded"/><idx:iform value="rebateding"/><idx:iform value="rebateds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Reflected or radiated back; here the hot rock wall throws its stored heat back onto the riders. An archaic sense of &#8220;rebate&#8221; meaning to beat or drive back.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the bake-oven air which it rebated&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="rebozo"><b>rebozo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="rebozos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> A traditional Mexican women&#8217;s long rectangular woven shawl, typically 2&#8211;3.5 meters long with knotted fringe; worn draped over the head and shoulders for warmth, sun protection, or as a head covering in church.</p><p class="q">&#8220;an old woman kneeling in a faded rebozo with her eyes cast down&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="rebozos"><b>rebozos</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="rebozo"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> Long, straight rectangular cloth wraps &#8212; a cross between a scarf and a shawl &#8212; worn by Mexican women for warmth, modesty, and carrying loads or infants; typically handwoven with fringed ends.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the women in dark rebozos, some with their breasts exposed&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> Traditional Mexican women&#8217;s shawls: long rectangular wraps worn over the head and shoulders.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Old women in black rebozos ran forth&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> Long woven Mexican shawls worn by women, draped over the head and shoulders; used for warmth, modesty, shade, and carrying infants.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the old women in black rebozos&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="rebuses"><b>rebuses</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="rebuse"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Signs or symbols that convey meaning through pictures or figures rather than words; cryptic pictographic puzzles. McCarthy uses the word to suggest the bloodstains in the sand are like mysterious signs that can be &#8220;read.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;the frail black rebuses of blood in those sands&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="receipt"><b>receipt</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="receipts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Here used in the sense of a receipt of proof or acknowledgment; specifically the scalp taken as proof of a kill, which could be presented to claim a bounty.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Get that receipt for us.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="recharge"><b>recharge the piece</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="piece"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> To reload a muzzle-loading firearm; &#8220;charging&#8221; a weapon means pouring in fresh powder and ball.</p><p class="q">&#8220;swung his horn about to recharge the piece&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="reconnoitred"><b>reconnoitred</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="reconnoitr"/><idx:iform value="reconnoitre"/><idx:iform value="reconnoitreded"/><idx:iform value="reconnoitreding"/><idx:iform value="reconnoitreds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Surveyed or scouted (terrain) for military purposes, to observe the layout and any threats.</p><p class="q">&#8220;fairly reconnoitred from the rise&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="recruit"><b>recruit</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="recruited"/><idx:iform value="recruiting"/><idx:iform value="recruits"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> <b>1.</b> In an archaic/military sense, to restore or refresh &#8212; to allow soldiers or animals to rest and recover their strength. Not the modern sense of enlisting new members.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They halted in the dark to recruit the animals&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> <b>2.</b> Archaic: to restore or recover one&#8217;s strength; to recuperate. An older sense now largely displaced by the modern meaning of enlisting new members.</p><p class="q">&#8220;until he could recruit himself&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> <b>3.</b> Here used in its older sense: to enlist or gather new members for a company or expedition, not necessarily from a formal military process.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Glanton and the judge went out to see if they could recruit any men from the rabble&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="recruited"><b>recruited</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="recruit"/><idx:iform value="recruite"/><idx:iform value="recruiteded"/><idx:iform value="recruiteding"/><idx:iform value="recruiteds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> In 19th-century usage, to allow animals to rest and recover their strength; to restore (horses or mules) after exertion by grazing or resting.</p><p class="q">&#8220;recruited their horses in the sparse swale&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="reefs"><b>reefs</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="reef"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Streaks or masses (here used of mist); originally a nautical term for a strip of sail or a ridge just below the water&#8217;s surface, extended to describe long, trailing masses of cloud or fog.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Reefs of mist were blowing across the slopes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="reeks"><b>reeks</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="reek"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Archaic plural of &#8220;reek&#8221; in its older sense: columns of vapor, smoke, or mist rising from a surface; here, the smoking vapors rising from snow-covered peaks.</p><p class="q">&#8220;wind swirled down cold and gray from the snowy reeks above them&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="reliquary"><b>reliquary</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="reliquaries"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A container &#8212; often ornate, of metal, glass, or stone &#8212; designed to hold the physical remains or personal effects of a saint; here used loosely for a cave floor scattered with the remnants of ancient occupation.</p><p class="q">&#8220;an old reliquary of flintknappings and ratchel&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="remonstrate"><b>remonstrate</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="remonstrated"/><idx:iform value="remonstrates"/><idx:iform value="remonstrating"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> To make a forceful protest or objection; to plead earnestly against a course of action.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The doctor came down to remonstrate with them&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="remuda"><b>remuda</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="remudas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> From Spanish: the herd of spare saddle-horses kept by a ranch or military outfit; the relay or replacement mounts.</p><p class="q">&#8220;mounted themselves out of the scattered remuda&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> From Spanish *remudar* (&#8220;to exchange&#8221;): the herd of spare saddle horses kept on a trail drive or expedition, from which riders choose daily mounts.</p><p class="q">&#8220;selected from that sorry remuda the animal least likely in appearance&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>3.</b> The herd of spare or reserve horses kept with a working outfit; each rider&#8217;s mounts other than the one currently being ridden. From Spanish <em>remuda</em> = replacement, relay.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the last spare horse out of the remuda&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="rent"><b>rent</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="rently"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Torn apart, ripped; past participle of &#8220;rend.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;so rent was his costume&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="replevined"><b>replevined</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="replevin"/><idx:iform value="replevine"/><idx:iform value="replevineded"/><idx:iform value="replevineding"/><idx:iform value="replevineds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Reclaimed or taken back (property); from the legal term replevin, a writ to recover personal property wrongfully taken; here used humorously of the judge having taken the idiot&#8217;s hat for himself.</p><p class="q">&#8220;perhaps the judge had replevined it&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="revetment"><b>revetment</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="revetments"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> In military fortification, a facing or retaining wall built against an earthen embankment (parapet) to hold it vertical; could be masonry, adobe, or timber. Here, the raised platform or parapet on which the cannon is mounted.</p><p class="q">&#8220;mounted on the revetment&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A retaining wall or facing of stone, sandbags, or earth built to support an embankment or the inner slope of a fortification; here the edge of the bone-strewn basin where the judge&#8217;s fire burns.</p><p class="q">&#8220;flickering in the wind at the edge of the revetment stood the judge&#8217;s nightfire&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="revival"><b>revival</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="revivals"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun, religion)</i> an evangelical meeting held to stir up or reawaken religious feeling.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;the man holding this revival is an imposter.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ribracks"><b>ribracks</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ribrack"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The rack of ribs from a butchered animal &#8212; the rib cage section, here roasted whole at the fire.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the blackened ribracks leaned steaming at the fires&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ribtines"><b>ribtines</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ribtine"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> McCarthy&#8217;s coinage for the upward-pointing tines or prongs of animal rib bones sticking out of the ground, resembling the tines of a fork or antler.</p><p class="q">&#8220;skulls and upturned ribtines&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ricks"><b>ricks</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="rick"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Large, neatly stacked outdoor piles of material (normally hay or straw); here enormous stacks of buffalo bones awaiting shipment.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They passed enormous ricks of bones&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ride"><b>ride and tie</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> A method by which two people share one horse: one rides ahead a certain distance, ties the horse, then walks on; the other catches up to the tied horse, mounts, rides past the first person, and repeats the cycle.</p><p class="q">&#8220;We could ride and tie.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="rigged"><b>rigged a broken lyre</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="broken"/><idx:iform value="lyre"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> The silent lightning to the north illuminated the dark horizon in jagged bolts shaped like the strings of a lyre (a harp-like stringed instrument of antiquity), but broken and irregular.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the silent lightning rigged a broken lyre upon the world&#8217;s dark rim&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>
