<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:idx="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf" xmlns:mbp="https://kindlegen.s3.amazonaws.com/AmazonKindlePublishingGuidelines.pdf">
<head><meta charset="utf-8"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="dict.css"/></head>
<body>
<mbp:frameset>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="scalped"><b>a 300,000-year-old fossil skull&#8230;scalped</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="fossil"/><idx:iform value="skull"/><idx:iform value="year"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(reference)</i> the Bodo cranium, an archaic-human skull from the Middle Awash bearing stone-tool cut-marks that researchers read as deliberate defleshing of the head. The 1982 article&#8217;s figure of 300,000 years was the estimate then in use; the skull is now dated closer to 600,000 years.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;a re-examination of a 300,000-year-old fossil skull&#8230;shows evidence of having been scalped.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="donde"><b>A donde va?</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Where are you going?&#8221; (Informal; standard form would be <em>&#191;A d&#243;nde van?</em>)</p><p class="q">&#8220;A donde va? called the judge.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="dónde"><b>A d&#243;nde vas&#8230; A casa</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="casa"/><idx:iform value="donde"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Where are you going?&#8221; &#8212; &#8220;Home&#8221; (literally &#8220;to [the] house&#8221;).</p><p class="q">&#8220;A donde vas?&#8230; A casa, said the man.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="shadowed"><b>a shadowed agony in the garden</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="agony"/><idx:iform value="garden"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(allusion)</i> an echo of the Agony in the Garden, Jesus&#8217;s anguished prayer at Gethsemane on the night before his arrest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;A shadowed agony in the garden.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="aback"><b>aback</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(preposition, dialectal)</i> on the back of; astride.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;and aback this animal&#8230;he rides&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="abilene"><b>Abilene</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="abilenes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A cattle-drive terminus city in north-central Kansas and the primary endpoint of the Chisholm Trail from 1867 onward, where Texas longhorns were shipped east by rail.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They were coming down from Abilene, forty days out&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="aborigines"><b>aborigines</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="aborigine"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The original or earliest known inhabitants of a region; used here to refer collectively to the indigenous peoples of the area.</p><p class="q">&#8220;as if the fate of the aborigines had been cast into shape&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Original or indigenous inhabitants of a region; here used as a general term for the Native Americans pursuing the fugitives across the desert.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Before noon the aborigines appeared&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>3.</b> The original or earliest known inhabitants of a region; indigenous peoples.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The aborigines moved along the sand ridge&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="abrogate"><b>abrogate</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="abrogated"/><idx:iform value="abrogates"/><idx:iform value="abrogating"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> To abolish, annul, or cancel formally; here used to mean rendered null and void &#8212; human transit and reckoning alike are annulled or made meaningless by that void.</p><p class="q">&#8220;man&#8217;s transit and his reckonings alike lay abrogate&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="abuelita"><b>Abuelita</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="abuelitas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Affectionate diminutive of <em>abuela</em> (grandmother); &#8220;little grandmother,&#8221; or simply &#8220;grandma.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Abuelita, he said. No puedes escucharme?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="abuelito"><b>Abuelito</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="abuelitos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Affectionate diminutive of abuelo (grandfather); here used as a respectful familiar address to the oldest man in the room.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Abuelito, he said.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="abutments"><b>abutments</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="abutment"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The solid masonry supports at either end of a structure, such as a bridge or fortification wall, that bear and resist lateral thrust.</p><p class="q">&#8220;among the abutments of an unfinished hillside fortification&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="acacia"><b>acacia</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="acacias"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A genus of thorny shrubs and trees (*Acacia* / *Vachellia*) common in the Sonoran Desert, characterized by feathery compound leaves, white or yellow puffball flowers, and sharp spines; the whitethorn acacia is a frequent scrub-country species in Sonora.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he nudged the pony up through the scraggly acacia&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="accoutred"><b>accoutred</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="accoutredly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Equipped or outfitted, especially with a full set of gear; from Middle French <em>accoutrer</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they traded the mule accoutred as it was&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="accoutrements"><b>accoutrements</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="accoutrement"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> Equipment and accessories, especially military gear and attachments; here referring to saddle fittings and associated tack.</p><p class="q">&#8220;loosed the other accoutrements&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Equipment and accessories, especially military gear and personal kit; here, saddle pistols and other equipment taken from the murdered scouts.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the saddle pistols and other accoutrements of the murdered scouts&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="acequias"><b>acequias</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> Irrigation ditches or water channels; from Arabic <em>as-s&#257;qiya</em> (&#8220;water carrier&#8221;), introduced to the Southwest by Spanish colonizers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the work of old acequias&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> Irrigation ditches or channels, derived from Arabic al-s&#257;qiya; the traditional system of water management used in Mexican and Southwest farming communities.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the fields were laid out with acequias&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>3.</b> Irrigation ditches or channels; from Arabic <em>as-s&#257;qiya</em> (the water carrier). In the Southwest, hand-dug earthen canals used to divert river water to farm fields, a system introduced by Spanish colonizers and inherited from Moorish irrigation traditions.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they rode past old acequias and small winter fields&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="acolytes"><b>acolytes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="acolyte"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Assistants or attendants in a religious ceremony; here used figuratively for the men descending into the hot spring as if performing a ritual.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they stripped and descended like acolytes into the water&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="adamantine"><b>adamantine</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="adamantinely"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> <b>1.</b> Unbreakably hard, impenetrable, or unyielding; having the quality of a diamond; from Greek <em>adamas</em>, &#8220;unconquerable.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;studied the adamantine deep beneath him&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> <b>2.</b> Having the hardness or unyielding solidity of a diamond; utterly impenetrable. From Greek <em>adamas</em> (unconquerable).</p><p class="q">&#8220;the adamantine ranges rising out of nothing&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="adduced"><b>adduced</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="adduc"/><idx:iform value="adduce"/><idx:iform value="adduceded"/><idx:iform value="adduceding"/><idx:iform value="adduceds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> Cited or brought forward as evidence or argument in support of a proposition.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He adduced for their consideration references to &#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="affair"><b>affair of honor</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="honor"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> A duel; the formal 19th-century euphemism for a pistol or sword duel fought to settle an insult to one&#8217;s honor.</p><p class="q">&#8220;I would think twice before I involved myself with him in an affair of honor&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="affray"><b>affray</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="affrays"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> a noisy public fight or brawl; in law, fighting in a public place to the alarm of bystanders.</p><p class="q">&#8220;An affray&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="afterguard"><b>afterguard</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="afterguards"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Nautical: the sailors stationed at the rear of a ship; by extension, the rearmost unit of a retreating force or column.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the harried afterguard of some ruined army retreating&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="agate"><b>agate</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="agates"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A translucent, banded variety of chalcedony (microcrystalline quartz), occurring in many colors; common in desert pavements.</p><p class="q">&#8220;tiny blocks of jasper, carnelian, agate&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="aggregate"><b>aggregate</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="aggregates"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Here used in its geological sense: a mass of rock fragments, gravel, or mineral particles compacted together; the coarse material of which a gravel or conglomerate deposit is composed.</p><p class="q">&#8220;walls of dry aggregate marked an old river course&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="aguardiente"><b>aguardiente</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="aguardientes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> Literally &#8220;burning water&#8221; (agua ardiente); a generic term for any crude distilled spirit, often a raw brandy or cane alcohol; common on the Mexican frontier.</p><p class="q">&#8220;drinking aguardiente from a flask&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> Literally &#8220;ardent water&#8221; (agua = water, ardiente = burning/fiery); a strong distilled spirit, typically made from sugarcane or grain, similar to brandy or raw whiskey.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Brown&#8230; poured a pitcher of aguardiente over a young soldier&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="alameda"><b>alameda</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="alamedas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> A tree-lined public promenade or small park in a Spanish colonial town, typically shaded by poplars (*&#225;lamos*) or cottonwoods; the central gathering place of the community.</p><p class="q">&#8220;in the squalid little alameda while the wind ransacked the trees&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mucho"><b>Alamo Mucho</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="alamo"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A desert well and watering station in what is now the Colorado Desert of Baja California, near the Colorado River crossing; long used by travellers on the Sonora Road; the name is Spanish for &#8220;the trimmed cottonwood&#8221; (&#225;lamo = cottonwood; mocho = lopped or cropped).</p><p class="q">&#8220;Alamo Mucho&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="alcalde"><b>alcalde</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="alcaldes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> Mayor or municipal magistrate; derived from Arabic al-q&#257;d&#299; (judge), the alcalde in Spanish colonial towns combined judicial and administrative authority.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The alcalde hanged&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> A mayor or municipal magistrate in a Spanish-speaking town; the chief civil official.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He was taken before the alcalde and this man spoke to him in a fatherly manner&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="alchemic"><b>alchemic</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="alchemicly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Of or relating to alchemy &#8212; the medieval proto-science that sought to transmute base metals into gold and to discover the philosopher&#8217;s stone. Mercury was a central substance in alchemical practice.</p><p class="q">&#8220;some ultimate alchemic work decocted from out the secret dark of the earth&#8217;s heart&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="alder"><b>alder</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="alders"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A moisture-loving tree of the genus <em>Alnus</em>, common along stream banks in mountain terrain; its wood produces a fine, low-ash charcoal prized for gunpowder manufacture.</p><p class="q">&#8220;willow and alder and cherry growin out of the rock&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="algodones"><b>Algodones ford</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ford"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A historic shallow crossing of the lower Colorado River near Algodones (present-day Winterhaven, California, opposite Yuma, Arizona), used by the Quechan people and by Spanish and American travelers as a passage between Arizona and California.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they crossed the river at the Algodones ford&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="alia"><b>Alia</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="alias"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Over there&#8221; (All&#225;); the old woman points in the direction of the courthouse.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Alia, she said. Alia.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="alkali"><b>alkali pan</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A flat, bare depression in arid terrain where water has repeatedly evaporated, leaving a hard white crust of salts and minerals on the surface.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they crossed an alkali pan whereon were convoked an assembly of men&#8217;s heads&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="almagre"><b>almagre</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="almagres"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> Red ochre &#8212; a reddish iron-oxide pigment (hematite) used as body paint, pottery decoration, and pigment; from Arabic via Spanish.</p><p class="q">&#8220;their faces stained red with almagre&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Red ochre &#8212; a natural iron oxide pigment (hematite, Fe&#8322;O&#8323;), reddish-brown, used for millennia as body and face paint throughout the Americas and Old World.</p><p class="q">&#8220;faces gotten up in indigo and almagre gaudy as the rumps of apes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="aloes"><b>aloes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="aloe"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Large succulent plants; in a New World desert context McCarthy likely means <em>Agave</em> species, which were sometimes called &#8220;aloes&#8221; in 19th-century usage; true <em>Aloe</em> is Old World.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the rare great aloes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="aloll"><b>aloll</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="alolled"/><idx:iform value="alolling"/><idx:iform value="alollly"/><idx:iform value="alolls"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adverb/adjective)</i> Hanging loosely; lolling out. McCarthy&#8217;s coinage compressing &#8220;a-loll&#8221; to describe the bear&#8217;s tongue dangling as it dances.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the bear with tongue aloll was revolving heavily&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="alparejas"><b>alparejas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Pack saddles; the wooden or padded frames strapped to the backs of mules and other pack animals to carry loads.</p><p class="q">&#8220;dried carcasses of mules with the alparejas still buckled about&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="alpenstock"><b>alpenstock</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="alpenstocks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A long wooden staff tipped with an iron spike, traditionally used by Alpine mountaineers and shepherds for travel on steep or icy terrain; here the judge uses his rifle as one.</p><p class="q">&#8220;his rifle for alpenstock&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="christ"><b>alter-christ</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="alter"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Latin / phrase)</i> From Latin <em>alter Christus</em>, &#8220;another Christ&#8221;; a theological title in Roman Catholic tradition for an ordained priest, who is said to act <em>in persona Christi</em> (in the person of Christ), especially in celebrating the Mass.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the hooded alter-christ had been cut down and disemboweled&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ambos"><b>Ambos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Both.&#8221; The judge wants both puppies.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Ambos, said the judge&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ambuscade"><b>ambuscade</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="ambuscades"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An ambush; troops or attackers concealed so as to make a surprise assault.</p><p class="q">&#8220;An ambuscade&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="amigos"><b>Amigos, somos amigos.</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="somos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Friends, we are friends.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Amigos, somos amigos.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="anareta"><b>Anareta</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="anaretas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> In traditional (Hellenistic and medieval) astrology, the &#8220;destroyer&#8221; &#8212; the planet or point in a birth chart identified as the cause of death, the agent that terminates life. From Greek <em>anaeretes</em> (&#8220;destroyer&#8221;). The phrase &#8220;the planet Anareta&#8221; treats it as a specific celestial body of doom.</p><p class="q">&#8220;exhausted upon the face of the planet Anareta&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="anasazi"><b>Anasazi</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="anasazis"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> A Navajo term applied to the Ancestral Puebloan peoples who built cliff dwellings and pueblos across the Four Corners region before around 1300 CE; the judge translates it as &#8220;the old ones.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;The people who once lived here are called the Anasazi. The old ones.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="anaximander"><b>Anaximander</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="anaximanders"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(person / historical)</i> Greek pre-Socratic philosopher from Miletus (c. 610&#8211;546 BC), student of Thales, who proposed that the fundamental substance of the universe is the <em>apeiron</em>&#8212;an infinite, indefinite boundless mass&#8212;and is credited with early world-mapping and a primitive theory of natural evolution.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He quoted &#8230; Anaximander, Thales.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="anchorite"><b>anchorite</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="anchorites"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A religious recluse who withdraws from society to live in solitary prayer and asceticism; loosely, any hermit living in isolation.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he hails up at the doorway of an old anchorite nested away in the sod&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A religious recluse who withdraws completely from the world, often enclosed in a cell, to live a life of solitary prayer; considered dead to secular society.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Another anchorite, another dawn.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="andale"><b>Andale</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="andales"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> An imperative meaning &#8220;Go on,&#8221; &#8220;Get moving,&#8221; or &#8220;Come on&#8221;; a colloquial Mexican Spanish expression urging someone to move or act.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Andale &#8230; You and your halfassedlookin niggers.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="amigables"><b>Andale &#8230; Ellos son amigables. Un poco borracho, nada mas.</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="andale"/><idx:iform value="borracho"/><idx:iform value="ellos"/><idx:iform value="nada"/><idx:iform value="poco"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Come on [move along] &#8230; They are friendly. A little drunk, nothing more.&#8221; <em>&#193;ndale</em> = go on, hurry up, come on (Mexican colloquial); <em>ellos son amigables</em> = they are friendly; <em>un poco borracho</em> = a little drunk; <em>nada m&#225;s</em> = nothing more.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Andale, he said &#8230; Ellos son amigables. Un poco borracho, nada mas.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="animas"><b>Animas peaks</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="peaks"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> <b>1.</b> The Animas Mountains, a compact range in the boot-heel of southwestern New Mexico, near the Chihuahua border, rising to about 8,500 feet.</p><p class="q">&#8220;to the north the Animas peaks dim and blue&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> <b>2.</b> The Animas Mountains, a small range in Hidalgo County, far southwestern New Mexico, rising to about 8,500 feet along the Continental Divide near the Mexican border.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Under the Animas peaks&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="antic"><b>antic clay</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="clay"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> &#8220;Antic&#8221; means grotesque, bizarre, or fantastically odd (from Italian <em>antico</em>, applied to grotesque figures in Roman ruins); &#8220;clay&#8221; is a standard literary figure for the mortal human body. Together: the grotesque, absurd stuff of which human beings are made.</p><p class="q">&#8220;If war is not holy man is nothing but antic clay&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="anticlines"><b>anticlines</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="anticline"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Geological folds in which rock layers arch upward, with the oldest rock at the core and younger layers dipping away on each side &#8212; the opposite of a syncline. Formed by compressional forces in the crust.</p><p class="q">&#8220;shelves of traprock reared in faults and anticlines&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="antiwarriors"><b>antiwarriors</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="antiwarrior"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> McCarthy&#8217;s coinage for the inverted mirror-image warriors seen in the atmospheric mirage above the real riders &#8212; their upside-down counterparts in the sky.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the howling antiwarriors pendant from their mounts&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="apacheria"><b>Apacheria</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="apacherias"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> The vast territory of the Southwest&#8212;including eastern Arizona, western New Mexico, western Texas, and adjacent northern Mexico&#8212;historically dominated and controlled by Apache bands.</p><p class="q">&#8220;half of all Apacheria in pursuit&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="apaches"><b>Apaches</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> A group of related Southern Athabaskan-speaking peoples of the American Southwest and northern Mexico, who resisted Anglo and Mexican encroachment throughout the 19th century; among the most formidable guerrilla fighters of the period.</p><p class="q">&#8220;They was Apaches&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="apishamore"><b>apishamore</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="apishamores"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A saddle blanket, traditionally made of buffalo hide; from Ojibwa apishimon (&#8220;something to lie on&#8221;), transmitted into frontier English via regional French.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the black&#8230; threw down his apishamore and sat upon it&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="apostate"><b>apostate</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="apostately"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Abandoning or renouncing a religious or doctrinal faith; here the judge&#8217;s geological reasoning is called apostate because it challenges biblical chronology.</p><p class="q">&#8220;other apostate supposings&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="mountains"><b>Aquarius Mountains</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="aquarius"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A real 45-mile-long mountain range in northwest Arizona (Mohave County), in the Arizona Transition Zone between the Colorado Plateau and the Sonoran Desert.</p><p class="q">&#8220;his wits had stood him as far west as the Aquarius Mountains&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="arcana"><b>arcana</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="arcanas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Plural of <em>arcanum</em> (Latin): secrets or mysteries, especially esoteric symbols, signs, or occult figures.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The canvas was scrawled with arcana&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="arcane"><b>arcane</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="arcanely"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Secret, mysterious, or known only to the initiated; here describing pictographs of uncertain or cryptic meaning.</p><p class="q">&#8220;curious birds and arcane maps&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="arcature"><b>arcature</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="arcatures"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A curve or arc; architecturally, a series of small arches. Here used to describe the faint arc of the gang&#8217;s track across the land, echoing the curvature of the earth.</p><p class="q">&#8220;their track &#8230; reflected in its faint arcature the movements of the earth itself&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> The curved line or arc of an arch; here used to describe the visible curvature of the earth&#8217;s surface at the horizon.</p><p class="q">&#8220;in its arcature&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="archimandrite"><b>archimandrite</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="archimandrites"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A senior monastic title in Eastern Christianity, denoting the superior of a monastery or a monk of high honorific rank, one step below bishop; literally &#8220;chief of the sheepfold&#8221; from Greek archi- (chief) + mandra (enclosure, monastery).</p><p class="q">&#8220;the judge&#8230; like some great balden archimandrite&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="archipelagos"><b>archipelagos</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="archipelago"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Chains or clusters of islands &#8212; here applied figuratively to isolated clumps of cloud floating above the desert horizon.</p><p class="q">&#8220;dark little archipelagos of cloud&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="ares"><b>ares</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="are"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Plural of are; a metric unit of area equal to 100 square meters (about 1,076 sq ft); eight or ten ares is roughly a hectare of enclosed ground.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The mission occupied eight or ten ares of enclosed land&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="argonauts"><b>argonauts</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="argonaut"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(allusion)</i> <b>1.</b> Gold-seekers heading to California; the term alludes to Jason&#8217;s crew in Greek myth who sailed in quest of the Golden Fleece, and was widely applied to the forty-niners of the 1849 California Gold Rush.</p><p class="q">&#8220;patched argonauts from the states driving mules&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> Literally, the crew of the mythical ship Argo that sought the Golden Fleece; by 1849 widely used to mean the prospectors heading to California in the Gold Rush.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the slain argonauts&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> <b>3.</b> A term applied to the gold-seekers who traveled to California in 1849 during the Gold Rush, by analogy with the mythological Greek heroes who sailed with Jason in quest of the Golden Fleece.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Argonauts&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>4.</b> A colloquial name for the gold-seekers who traveled to California during the 1849 Gold Rush, comparing them to the heroes of Greek myth who sailed with Jason in search of the Golden Fleece.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the cotton shirts of the argonauts who&#8217;d passed there&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="argosy"><b>argosy</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="argosies"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A large, richly laden ship or fleet; originally from Ragusa (now Dubrovnik), whose great merchant vessels gave English the word; here used figuratively for the blood-stained column of riders bearing their grim cargo.</p><p class="q">&#8220;that bloodstained argosy through their streets&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="arkansas"><b>Arkansas River</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="river"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> A major tributary of the Mississippi rising in the Colorado Rockies and flowing southeast through Kansas; in the 1870s the Atchison, Topeka &amp; Santa Fe Railroad followed it westward, making towns along it (especially Dodge City) key railheads for shipping buffalo hides.</p><p class="q">&#8220;between the Arkansas River and the Concho&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="arraignment"><b>arraignment</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="arraignments"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A formal court proceeding at which a criminal charge is read to the accused and a plea is entered.</p><p class="q">&#8220;An arraignment&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="arrant"><b>arrant</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="arrantly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Complete, utter, thoroughgoing &#8212; used to intensify a negative quality; here the darkness below them is absolute, unrelieved blackness.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they studied the arrant blackness under them&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="arrieros"><b>arrieros</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Muleteers; mule drivers. Singular: <em>arriero</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the whipcrack and cry of the arrieros on the switchbacks&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="arroyo"><b>arroyo</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="arroyos"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> A dry watercourse or streambed, typically steep-sided and flat-floored, found in arid and semi-arid landscapes of the American Southwest; it flows only after heavy rain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;rode up a dry arroyo&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> A dry streambed or gulch that fills with water only after rain; a common term in the arid Southwest.</p><p class="q">&#8220;In the dry sand of the arroyo floor&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="arroyos"><b>arroyos</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Dry streambeds or gullies, typically steep-sided channels carved by intermittent water flow in arid terrain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;racing in the stone arroyos like the imbreachment of some ultimate alchemic work&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="artemisia"><b>artemisia</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="artemisias"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Sagebrush; aromatic silver-grey shrubs of the genus <em>Artemisia</em>, dominant across arid basins and high plateaus of western North America and northern Mexico.</p><p class="q">&#8220;down among blooming artemisia and aloe&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="aslant"><b>aslant</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="aslanted"/><idx:iform value="aslanting"/><idx:iform value="aslants"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adverb)</i> At a slant; obliquely; coming in at an angle rather than straight down.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the periodic arrows sprang aslant from the sands&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="asquint"><b>asquint</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="asquinted"/><idx:iform value="asquinting"/><idx:iform value="asquintly"/><idx:iform value="asquints"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adverb / adjective)</i> Looking sideways or obliquely; squinting; an archaic expression for a sidelong, suspicious glance.</p><p class="q">&#8220;regarded him with one eye asquint&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="astrolabes"><b>astrolabes</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="astrolabe"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Ancient astronomical instruments for measuring the altitude of stars or the sun above the horizon, used for navigation, timekeeping, and determining latitude; consisting of a calibrated disk with a rotating sighting arm. By the 1840s largely superseded by the sextant.</p><p class="q">&#8220;vaguely navigational like slender astrolabes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="hazard"><b>at hazard</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> At stake; subject to risk or chance.</p><p class="q">&#8220;Where only the rules are at hazard&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="long"><b>at long taw</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(phrase)</i> In the game of marbles, &#8220;taw&#8221; is the shooting line or the large shooter marble; &#8220;long taw&#8221; means shooting from a great distance, and by extension a contest or confrontation at long range where the odds are unfavorable.</p><p class="q">&#8220;At long taw&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="atavistic"><b>atavistic</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="atavisticly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> <b>1.</b> Reverting to or evoking the traits, behaviors, or forms of a remote ancestor or primitive type; relating to a throwback to an earlier evolutionary or cultural stage.</p><p class="q">&#8220;some wild thaumaturge out of an atavistic drama&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> <b>2.</b> Relating to atavism: the reappearance of a trait from a remote ancestor, or a reversion to a primitive, pre-civilizational type.</p><p class="q">&#8220;no trace of any ultimate atavistic egg&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="attainder"><b>attainder</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="attainders"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In English common law, the forfeiture of all civil rights and the &#8220;corruption of blood&#8221; that followed a sentence of death or outlawry for treason or a capital felony, extinguishing the condemned&#8217;s right to hold or pass on property.</p><p class="q">&#8220;he quoted from cases of attainder insofar as he reckoned them germane to the corruption of blood&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="attic"><b>attic</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="atticly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Here: of or relating to Attica or ancient Athens &#8212; classical, of antique Greek character. The &#8220;Attic&#8221; style was defined by pure, unornamented simplicity. Modern readers will misread this as the room under a roof.</p><p class="q">&#8220;costumes attic or biblical&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="aubergines"><b>aubergines</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="aubergine"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Eggplants (<em>Solanum melongena</em>); the British English word, from French, used here as a vivid simile for the hanging, dark-purplish, wrinkled breasts of the old Apache woman.</p><p class="q">&#8220;her paps like wrinkled aubergines&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="aught"><b>aught</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="aughts"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(pronoun)</i> Archaic for &#8220;anything&#8221; or &#8220;anything at all.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Might have shot him for one if he&#8217;d had aught to shoot him with&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="auguries"><b>auguries</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="augurie"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Omens or signs &#8212; originally, signs read by Roman augurs who interpreted bird behavior and other natural phenomena to divine the will of the gods. Here: signs or portents of human presence in the ancient landscape.</p><p class="q">&#8220;such auguries everywhere of the hand of man before man was&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="avatars"><b>avatars</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="avatar"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Manifestations or embodied forms; from Sanskrit, originally the descent of a Hindu deity into earthly form, used here for the shimmering doubled shapes of the riders seen in the heat mirage.</p><p class="q">&#8220;augmented by planes in lurid avatars&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="awap"><b>awap</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="awaped"/><idx:iform value="awaping"/><idx:iform value="awaps"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adverb)</i> Rare or McCarthy-specific coinage; meaning askew, crookedly ajar, or flung agape on the hinges.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The huge carved and paneled doors hung awap on their hinges&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="awl"><b>awl</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="awls"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A small pointed tool used to pierce holes in leather or wood, typically for stitching or sewing heavy material such as straps and harness.</p><p class="q">&#8220;mending a strap with an awl&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="axletrees"><b>axletrees</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="axletree"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> The fixed crosswise bars running beneath a wagon on whose rounded spindle-ends the wheels revolve; a dead axle &#8212; the wheels turn on it rather than with it, from Old English <em>eax</em> (axle) + <em>tr&#275;ow</em> (beam).</p><p class="q">&#8220;the great wheels cut from rounds of a cottonwood trunk and pinned to the axletrees with tenons&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> The fixed iron bars or shafts upon which wagon wheels revolve; the central structural members connecting opposite wheels of a vehicle.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the iron axletrees marked the shapes of the wagons&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="azimuth"><b>azimuth</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="azimuths"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The angular bearing of a celestial object measured clockwise from north along the horizon; used in navigation to fix direction by the position of a star.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The azimuth&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="azotea"><b>azotea</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="azoteas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> A flat rooftop, especially on an adobe building; from Arabic <em>al-sut&#225;y&#7717;a</em> (the little surface). Used here as a military parapet from which guards could watch the surrounding terrain.</p><p class="q">&#8220;posted guards atop the azotea&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="azoteas"><b>azoteas</b></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>1.</b> Flat rooftops or rooftop terraces, characteristic of Spanish colonial architecture in Mexico; the plural of <em>azotea</em>.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the gutters and the spouts from the azoteas ran with blood&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>2.</b> Flat rooftops or roof terraces; from Arabic <em>al-sut&#333;&#7717;</em>. In Mexican colonial architecture the flat earthen roof served as a defensive platform.</p><p class="q">&#8220;men kept watchfires burning on the azoteas or roofs&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> <b>3.</b> Flat rooftops; in Mexican and Spanish colonial architecture, the flat roof of a building that can be used as a terrace, a lookout, or a fighting position.</p><p class="q">&#8220;from the walls and azoteas of abandoned haciendas&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bacca"><b>bacca</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="baccas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Dialectal contraction of &#8220;tobacco.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;Dont have no bacca with ye do ye?&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bagnios"><b>bagnios</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bagnio"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Brothels; originally the Italian/Turkish word for bathhouse, it passed into English as a term for a house of prostitution by the 18th century.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the lamplit bagnios they passed&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="baize"><b>baize</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="baizes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A coarse woolen cloth with a felt-like nap, traditionally dyed green; used to line gun cases, card tables, and billiard tables.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the case&#8230; was lined with green baize&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bajada"><b>bajada</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bajadas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> From Spanish for &#8220;slope&#8221; or &#8220;descent&#8221;: a broad, gently inclined alluvial apron formed at the base of desert mountains by the merging of multiple alluvial fans; a characteristic landform of the Sonoran Desert piedmont.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a barren bajada grown only with sporadic ocotillo and stands of grama&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="balden"><b>balden</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="baldenly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> <b>1.</b> Becoming bald or losing hair; a rare archaic form derived from &#8220;bald,&#8221; used here as a participial modifier. The word is not found in ordinary modern prose and gives the compound image a fossil, antique quality.</p><p class="q">&#8220;shambling past the fires like a balden groundsloth&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> <b>2.</b> An archaic or dialectal form of &#8220;bald&#8221;; hairless, bare-headed. McCarthy applies it specifically to the judge, who is described throughout the novel as entirely hairless.</p><p class="q">&#8220;some great balden archimandrite&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="baldness"><b>baldness</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="baldnes"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Here used figuratively: brazen or unadorned shamelessness; the quality of being stark and undisguised.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The lieutenant seemed stunned at the baldness of these disclaimers&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="baldric"><b>baldric</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="baldrics"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A belt or strap worn diagonally across the chest&#8212;over one shoulder, across the torso, and under the opposite arm&#8212;used to carry a sword, horn, or other weapon.</p><p class="q">&#8220;carried in a torn and gaudy baldric one of the Whitneyville Colts&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="balefire"><b>balefire</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="balefires"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An archaic word for a large open-air fire; it could mean a beacon fire, a bonfire, or a funeral pyre. From Old English b&#230;lf&#255;r.</p><p class="q">&#8220;On that raw tablestone the flames of their balefire swirled&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bandera"><b>bandera</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="banderas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> Flag, banner.</p><p class="q">&#8220;dragging the sacred bandera in the mud behind him&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bandylegged"><b>bandylegged</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bandyleggedly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> <b>1.</b> Having legs that bow outward at the knees &#8212; bowlegged. A natural result of a lifetime on horseback; here applied to the Comanches&#8217; crouching, awkward run on foot.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a peculiar bandylegged trot like creatures driven to alien forms of locomotion&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> <b>2.</b> Having legs that curve outward at the knees; bow-legged. A common result of a lifetime on horseback.</p><p class="q">&#8220;He was bandylegged for all his height&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="tree"><b>bare tree</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bare"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> The wooden frame (tree) of a saddle without any leather covering or fittings; here modified only by rawhide rather than tooled leather.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a Texas stock saddle, bare tree with rawhide cover&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="barlatch"><b>barlatch</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="barlatches"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A bar-shaped bolt or latch used to secure a door from the inside.</p><p class="q">&#8220;shot the wooden barlatch home behind him&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="barrel"><b>barrel organ</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="organ"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> A portable mechanical musical instrument in which turning a hand crank rotates a pinned barrel that triggers organ pipes to produce tunes automatically, without a trained musician; the traditional instrument of street and traveling entertainers.</p><p class="q">&#8220;a little girl in a smock cranked a barrel organ&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="barrister"><b>barrister</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="barristers"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In the British legal system, a lawyer qualified to plead cases in a superior court; a courtroom advocate who carries a valise and argues law.</p><p class="q">&#8220;some immense and naked barrister whom the country had crazed&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="barrows"><b>barrows</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="barrow"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Here in the sense of barrow = a large carrying cart or conveyance; the bone-wagons into which pickers tossed their loads. (Barrow in the sense of a carrying frame, from Old English beran, &#8220;to carry,&#8221; is distinct from the burial-mound sense; both associations lend the passage a funereal weight.)</p><p class="q">&#8220;Into these barrows the pickers tossed the bones&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="basilisks"><b>basilisks</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="basilisk"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> In context, the horned lizards (*Phrynosoma* spp.), small spiny desert lizards that can squirt blood from the corners of their eyes as a defense mechanism; McCarthy borrows the name of the legendary serpent to heighten their strangeness.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the little desert basilisks that jet blood from their eyes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="basta"><b>Basta</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bastas"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(Spanish)</i> &#8220;Enough&#8221; or &#8220;Stop&#8221; &#8212; a sharp command to cease.</p><p class="q">&#8220;The leader reached down and tapped the canteen. Basta, he said&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="batboard"><b>batboard</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="batboardly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> built of board-and-batten&#8212;wide boards with narrow strips nailed over the gaps between them.</p><p class="q">&#8220;&#8230;the batboard jakes&#8230;&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bated"><b>bated</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bat"/><idx:iform value="bate"/><idx:iform value="bateded"/><idx:iform value="bateding"/><idx:iform value="bateds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb)</i> From falconry: <em>to bate</em> is for a hawk or bird of prey to beat its wings and strain away from the perch in agitation; McCarthy applies the term to buzzards startled off a carcass.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they bated and hissed and flapped clumsily&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="arsenal"><b>Baton Rouge arsenal</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="baton"/><idx:iform value="rouge"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(proper noun)</i> The U.S. Army Arsenal and Ordnance Depot established at Baton Rouge, Louisiana in 1816; it served as the principal ordnance supply depot for the southwestern United States throughout the 19th century.</p><p class="q">&#8220;ordnance box from the Baton Rouge arsenal&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="baviacora"><b>Baviacora</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="baviacoras"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(place)</i> Bavi&#225;cora, a town in the Sonora River valley of central Sonora, Mexico, founded as a Jesuit mission in the 17th century.</p><p class="q">&#8220;the plains west of Baviacora&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bayonet"><b>bayonet plants</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="plants"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Spanish bayonet &#8212; yucca species (<em>Yucca aloifolia</em> and relatives) with stiff, dagger-pointed leaves in terminal rosettes; named for their resemblance to a blade.</p><p class="q">&#8220;deadlylooking bayonet plants&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="beclamored"><b>beclamored</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="beclamoredly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Filled with clamor and noise; a rare archaic past-participial formation meaning &#8220;made loud with clamoring.&#8221;</p><p class="q">&#8220;a night so beclamored with the jackal-yapping of coyotes&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bedight"><b>bedight</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bedightly"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(adjective)</i> Adorned, arrayed, or decked out. An archaic past participle of the Middle English verb <em>dight</em> (to set in order, clothe, array), surviving mainly in poetry.</p><p class="q">&#8220;lancers and archers bearing shields bedight with bits of broken mirrorglass&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="bedlamites"><b>bedlamites</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="bedlamite"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Madmen or lunatics; from Bedlam (Bethlem Royal Hospital, London&#8217;s notorious asylum).</p><p class="q">&#8220;the streets were filled with besotted bedlamites lurching and cursing&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="beldam"><b>beldam</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="beldams"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> An old woman, especially a haggard or witch-like one; from Old French <em>bele dame</em> (fine lady), used ironically.</p><p class="q">&#8220;La carroza, la carroza, cried the beldam.&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="beltways"><b>beltways</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="beltway"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Here used in an astronomical or cosmological sense for the broad bands or zones of matter in the sky; not the common modern sense of a highway ring road.</p><p class="q">&#8220;distant beltways of matter grinding mutely to the west&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="benches"><b>benches</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="benche"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> Flat, shelf-like terraces of land on a hillside or mountainside, resembling steps.</p><p class="q">&#8220;on those grassy benches the great shambling figures of bears&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="benchland"><b>benchland</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="benchlands"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>1.</b> A long, relatively flat strip of elevated ground bounded by steeper slopes above and below, typically a former floodplain left standing above a river&#8217;s current level by downward cutting.</p><p class="q">&#8220;they rode along a benchland above the gaunt rill of water&#8221;</p><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> <b>2.</b> A flat or gently sloping terrace of land partway up a canyon or hillside, formed by differential erosion and standing above the valley floor.</p><p class="q">&#8220;When he reached the benchland above the canyon floor&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="benighted"><b>benighted</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="benight"/><idx:iform value="benighte"/><idx:iform value="benighteded"/><idx:iform value="benighteding"/><idx:iform value="benightedly"/><idx:iform value="benighteds"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(verb / adjective)</i> Overtaken by darkness or nightfall while traveling; to be caught out in the night.</p><p class="q">&#8220;darkness overtook them and they were benighted in that place&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
<idx:entry name="headword" scriptable="yes" spell="yes"><idx:orth value="benjamin"><b>benjamin</b><idx:infl><idx:iform value="benjamins"/></idx:infl></idx:orth><p class="d"><i>(noun)</i> 19th-century British and American slang for an overcoat or loose outer coat; the word derives, by biblical analogy with Joseph&#8217;s coat, from the name Benjamin, Joseph&#8217;s younger brother.</p><p class="q">&#8220;an old woolen benjamin over the one shoulder&#8221;</p></idx:entry>
</mbp:frameset>
</body>
</html>
